

PROCEEDINGS 
OF 
THE CENTRE FOR MATHEMATICS AND ITS APPLICATIONS 
AUSTRALIAN NATIONAL UNIVERSITY 
VOLUME 27, 1991 
ON UNIQUENESS IN THE LARGE OF SOLUTIONS OF 
EINSTEIN'S EQUAT I trong Cosm1 c CensorshHl'') 
PIOTR T. CHRUSCIEl 
First published in Australia 1991 
(£) Centre for Mathematics and its Applications, 
Australian National University 
This book is copyright. Apart from any fair dealing for the purpose of 
private study, research, criticism, or review, as permitted under the 
Copyright Act, no part may be reproduced by any process without written 
permission. Inquiries should be made to the publisher. 
National Library of Australia 
Cataloguing-in-Publication entry 
Chrusciel, Piotr T. 
On Uniqueness in the Large of Solutions of Einstein's Equations 
("Strong Cosmic Censorship") 
ISBN 0 7315 0443 7. 
1. Einstein field equations. I. Australian National University. 
Centre for Mathematics and its Applications. 
IL Title. (Series: Proceedings of the Centre for Mathematics and its 
Applications, Australian National University; v. 1991/27). 
530.142 
Contents 
1 Introduction 
1.1 The spacelike Cauchy problem in General Relativity . 7 
1.2 Singularities? . . . . . . . . 16 
1.3 Strong Cosmic Censorship? 19 
1.4 (Weak) Cosmic Censorship? 22 
1.5 Some answers, in spatially compact space-times with two or more spacelike 
Killing vector fields. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25 
1.6 Spatially open space-times: some small data results. 34 
1. 7 Beyond the spacelike Cauchy problem: Robinson- Trautman space-times. 38 
1.8 Necessary conditions for uniqueness in the large. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43 
2 "Highly symmetric" space-times 
2.1 From symmetric Cauchy data to symmetric space-times. 
2.2 S0(3) x U(1) symmetric space-times, 3 2:; = L(p, 1). 
2.3 S0(3) symmetry, 2-dimensional principal orbits. 
2.4 Spatially compact Bianchi I space-times. . ... 
3 U(l) x U(l) stability of the (~, ~' -~) Kasner metrics. 
1 
49 
49 
59 
61 
65 
68 
3.1 Introduction - notation 
3.2 Pointwise Estimates ... 
3.3 Integral "Decay" Estimates 
3.4 Pointwise "Decay" Estimates 
3.5 The Stability Theorem. . . . . 
68 
69 
74 
76 
81 
A On the "hyperboloidal initial data", and Penrose conditions. 87 
B On a dass of U(l) x U(l) symmetric metrics found by V.Moncrief. 94 
Rl A harmonic map problem. 
B.2 Moncrief's space-times ... 
C fVIaximal developments. 
C.l Existence of maximal space-times. 
C.2 Some rnaxirnality criteria. . .... 
D Some flat metrics with Cauchy horizons. 
E On a wave equation with a singular source. 
F Bifurcating geodesics in C1~;, 0 < o: < 1, metrics. 
2 
94 
101 
106 
106 
108 
114 
117 
119 
r 
' 
Chapter 1 
Introduction 
In the last ten years or so a considerable amount of work has been done to transform gen­
eral relativity into a mathematically rigorous discipline. With the work of Christodoulou 
and Klainerman [29] on stability of Minkowski space-time, the work of Schoen and Yau 
[113] on the positive energy theorem, the work of Christodoulou [26] [27] on the grav­
itational collapse, the work of Newman [100] and others ( cf e.g. [55] and references 
therein) on Yau's Lorentzian splitting conjecture, the work of Bartnik [7] on maximal 
hypersurfaces in Lorentzian manifolds, general relativity has become a respectable field of 
mathematical research. For an analyst interested in differential geometry, general relativ­
ity turns out to be a rich source of various, sometimes extremely difficult, mathematical 
problems, encompassing all classical classes of partial differential equations - hyperbolic 
( cf e.g. [49] [29] [53]), elliptic ( cf. e.g. [19] [7] [9] [74] [127] [3] [2]), and even parabolic ( cf. 
e.g. [8] [33]), as well as some difficult problems of the theory of dynamical systems ( cf. 
e.g. [12] [121]). The aim of this paper is to present to a mathematically oriented reader 
' 
one of the current research problems in general relativity - the problem of uniqueness 
in the large of solutions of Einstein's equations, also known under the baroque name of 
"strong cosmic censorship". 
In this chapter we discuss some old and new results on global structure of space-time. 
3 
In Section 1.1 some classical results on the Cauchy problem in general relativity are 
reviewed- emphasis is put on things which are not known (and which the author would 
like to know1 ). In Section 1.2 the shortcomings of the classical singularity theory are 
pointed out. In Sections 1.3 and 1.4 the "strong cosmic censorship conjecture" and the 
"weak cosmic censorship conjecture" are discussed. In the Sections that follow, answers 
to some of the questions raised in the previous Sections are presented. In Section 1.5 
results on cosmological space-times with spacelike Killing vectors are presented. In 
Section 1.6 some stability results are reviewed. In Section L7 the Robinson-Trautman' 
space-times are discussed. We dose this Chapter by discussing in Section 1.8 what 
restrictions one needs to on both Cauchy data and space-times so that generic 
predictability of Einstein's theory can be eventually attained. In Chapter 2, proofs of 
the results discussed in Section 1.5, the symmetry group U(l) x U(l) non-including, are 
given. The "U(l) x U(l) stability of strong cosmic censorship" in a neighbourhood of 
a (pt,p 2 ,p3 ) = (~, ~' -~) Kasner metric is proved in Chapter 3. Some miscellaneous 
results are collected in the Appendices. The motivation for this work and the results 
presented here are best illustrated by Tables 1.0.1 and 1.0.2 ("S.C.C." stands for "Strong 
C . C · h' " "T 'T B P " .r: "'l'h t b d" --r S t. 1 1) " t bl osrn1c ensors 1p , .. , . . tor ~" eorem- o- e-prove , c,. , ec 1on . ~ . ln a e 
LO.l all connected Lie groups which admit an effective action on a compact, connected, 
orientable three dimensional manifold and the appropriate manifolds are listed, following 
Fischer [45] 2• 
Acknowledgements: The author wishes to express special thanks to V. Moncrief, 
R. Bartnik and J. Baez for many useful discussions. At various stages of work on the 
topics discussed here the author also benefited from comments from or discussions with 
D. Christodoulou, H. Friedrich, D. Garfinkle, J. 
D. Singleton. 
M. MacCallum, J, Shatah and 
~u1aes:t1m1s similar to the ones raised here can also be found in Refs. [43] [94] [6] [123]. 
2It should be pointed out that the list of manifolds which admit a U(l) action given in [45] is 
incomplete. 
4 
Symmetry Group 3 ~ Topology Supplementary Conditions S.C. C. (T. T.B.P.) 
S0(4) s3 
no vacuum metrics 3 
S0(3) x S0(3) JP3 
(U(1) X SU(2))/D L(p,1) 
p-odd 
no4 
L(p, 1) 
no4 
U(1) x S0(3) p -even 
S1 X S 2 ! yes5 
SU(2) L(p, 1) ? (probably yes6 ) 
p-odd 
L(p, 1) 
? (probably yes6 ) 
p- even 
S0(3) S1 X S2 
JP3#JP3 
! yes5, 7 
JP3 
no vacuum metrics 8 
S3fr 
U(1) x U(1) x U(1) T3 yes9 
L(p,q) 
9~J.vXfX!{ = 0 yes1o 
S1 X S 2 
9~J.vXfX!{ = 0 yes1o 
U(1) x U(1) T3 e~J.vpo-Xf X!{'\JP X: = 0 
"small" data, 
~ yes11 
eiL"P,.Xi X!{'\JP x: = 0 
L(p,q) 
S1 X S2 ?12 
T3 
U(1) ?13 
Table 1.0.1: Strong cosmic censorship, spatially compact case 
5 
II Symmetry Group 3'\' Topology Supplementary Conditions S.C. C. (T. T.B.P.) """ 
U(l) X 1R JR3 yes14 
"small", smoothly 1 yes 
JR3 conformaBy compact 15 (yes to the future 16 , 
"hyperboloidal" data ? to the past) 
{1} 
"small", asymptotically yes17 
flat data 
IR X S 2 
Robinson- Trautman m > 0: no18 
J space-times I m < 0: ~yes 
Table 1.0.2: Strong cosmic censorship in vacuum "minisuperspaces", spatially open case. 
page 25; JP3 denotes the three dimensional reai projective space. 
4 D is the subgroup {(1,1), -1)}, L(p,q) denotes a lens space, recall that L(l,l) =53 . These 
are the Taub-NUT metrics, cf. Section 2.2. 
5These are !;he Kantowski-Sachs cosmological models; the metric is the Schwarzschild metric 
"beiow the Schwarzschild horizon", r <2m, cf. Section 2.3; the space-tirnes are extendible to, say, the 
past of 3 E and inextendible to its future. 
6These are the Bianchi IX metrics, cf. page 26; no rigorous results on inextendability (strong cosmic 
censorship) have been established so far. 
7 # denotes the connected topological sum. 
8 cf. Section 2.3; for a list of all possible groups r 
9These are the Kasner metrics, cf. Section 2.4. 
which 53 is divided, cf. 
10These are the polarized Gowdy metrics; the X a's, a::::: 1, 2, are Killing vectors, cf. Theorem 1.5.1. 
11 Yes to the, say, past, probably yes to the future, cf Theo1·em 1.5.2. 
12 Partia! results on global existence are available, cf. Section 1.5, but no inextendibility results are 
known. 
[45] for a list of possible manifolds and no rigorous resu!is on s.c.c. are known. To the 
list of manifolds with a U ( 1) action m one should add the Eilenberg-Mac Lane spaces K(x, 1) 
whose fundamental group has an infinite cyclic center (A.Fischer, private communication). 
14This is an unpublished result of Christodoulou, cf. Theorem 1.5.3. 
15 J3y this we mean that (3 E, g) is conformally isometlljc to a compact manifold with boundary, with a 
6 
1.1 The spacelike Cauchy problem in General Rel­
ativity 
Let us start with recalling some basic facts about the Cauchy problem in general rel­
ativity. The Cauchy data for vacuum Einstein equations consist of a triple (L;, g, K) 
where (L;, g) is a three dimensional Riemannian manifold 19 with a metric of appropriate 
differentiability class (which we shall discuss later), Kis a symmetric tensor on 2: (rep­
resenting, roughly speaking, the time derivative of g), and g, I< are assumed to satisfy a 
system of four coupled "constraint equations": 
~ .. .. 2 
"'R = K'1 K;i - (g'1 K;i) , 
where 3 R is the Ricci curvature scalar of g, I denotes the Levi-Civita covariant derivative 
defined by the metric g, which arise as a consequence of the Gauss-Codazzi equations. 
A triple (M,1,i), where (M,1) is Lorentzian manifold and i: 2:---> M is an embedding 
of a three dimensional manifold L; in M, is called a development of (L;, g, K) if 1 satisfies 
the vacuum Einstein equations: 
R,uv = 0 
where R1w is the Ricci tensor of 1, and if 
i*K- K - , 
metric which can be extended in a sufficiently differentiable way to a metric on a slightly larger manifold, 
cf Section 1.6 and Appendix A for details. 
16This result is due to Friedrich; no symmetry conditions are assumed, cf. Theorem 1.6.1. 
17This result is due to Christodoulou and Klainerman; no symmetry conditions are assumed, cf. 
Theorem 1.6.2. 
18 m> 0: no, cf. Theorem 1.7.2; m < 0: no to the future, yes to the past, cf. Theorem 1.7.1. 
19 Unless specified otherwise, "manifold" is used here to denote a connected, u-compact (cf. e.g. [78]) 
manifold without boundary, the degree of differentiability of which can be in principle inferred from the 
context. We will not assume at the outset Hausdorffness of space-times, because of the existence of 
non-Hausdorff extensions of the globally hyperbolic region of the Taub-NUT space-time, cf [64]. On 
the other hand we shall be conservative and always assume that the Riemannian manifold I: on which 
Cauchy data (g, K) are defined is always Hausdorff. 
7 
where I{ is the extrinsic curvature tensor of i(~} in M. We shall often say that (M, 1) 
is a development, whenever no need arises to make i explicit. Some authors add the 
requirement of global hyperbolicity in the definition of development, it should be stressed 
that we are not adding this restriction. From the invariance of Einstein equations under 
di:ffeomorphisms it follows that for every diffeomorphism <P : N -+ M, if ( M, 1) is a 
development of (E,g,I<), so is (N,<P*I) (the appropriate embedding is <P-1 o i). A 
development will be called maximal if "there exists no larger development"; technically, 
if <P : M -+ M' is an isometric diffeomorphism 20 from M to <P(M) and if the metric 1' on 
M' satisfies vacuum Einstein equations, then M' = <P(M). (For completeness we prove 
the existence of maximal developments in Appendix C.l.) (M,1) will be said strongly 
maximal if there exists no larger Lorentzian manifold (not necessarily satisfying the field 
equations) in which (M,1) can be isometrically embedded). It should be stressed that 
some maximal developements may fail to be strongly maximal, because it could happen 
that there exist non-vacuum space-times ( Al, 7) extending a given space-time, while no 
vacuum extensions of (M,1) exist. We shall say that (M,1) is strongly maximal to the 
future, respectively to the past, if in any extension (AI, 7) of ( M, the set of points 
p E .M, p f/. l'vf such that p lies to the future of M, respectively p lies to the past of M, 
is empty. 
The theorem one would like to prove in general relativity is the following: 
Theorem-to-be-proved 1 (TTBP) For every three dimensional manifold ~ there 
exists a space of Cauchy data X(E) and a class of four dimensional Lorentzian manifolds 
M(~) such that: 
1. for all Cauchy data zn a dense set "generic Cauchy data" Y(~) C X(E) the 
20 By an abuse of language a locally Lipschitz continuous bijection with locally Lipschitz continuous 
inverse will also be considered to be a diffeomorphism, if useful in the context. The usefulness of such a 
weak notion of diffeomorphism relies in the fact, that such transformations are "as regular + 1" as the 
least regular of g and <I>* g: more precisely, if both g and <I>* g are in a Sobolev class H}oc, then 4> must 
be in H~+1 (similar properties hold in Cfoe or cto·c"' spaces). Therefore once the class of differentiability 
of the metrics one speaks about is fixed, one needs not to worry about the differentiability class of such 
"diffeomorphisms". 
8 
Cauchy problem admits a unique maximal solution (M, 1) in M(L:), 
2. with (I\1, 1) -strongly maximal, moreover 
3. all smooth pairs (g, I<) satisfying the constraint equations and satisfying some com­
pleteness and/or fall-off conditions are in X(L:). 
Condition 1 is the requirement of generic predictability of any theory. As we shall see 
later, there exist smooth initial data in general relativity for which it seems that neither 
uniqueness nor strong maximality of developments holds. The undefined condition of 
genericity is also meant to capture the fact, that Cauchy data for which uniqueness in 
the large holds are stable, and a precise statement should of course be implemented by a 
definition of "genericity" -a tentative possibility could be that Y(:E) is open and dense. 
Condition 2 - strong maximality - is a necessary condition to be able to predict the 
evolution of "things" as long as they can "potentially exist": the existence of an extension 
( M', 1') of a maximal development ( M, 1) would mean that there are observers which 
leave M to end up in M 1 in which, by definition of maximal development, the metric 
cannot satisfy the field equations. Condition 3 is a requirement for the applicability of the 
theory to all possible physical situations 21 ; the proviso of some completeness and/ or fall­
off restrictions is necessary, as will be discussed in Section 1.8. At this stage the reader 
may wish to assume that if I: is compact, then all smooth solutions of the constraint 
equations should be in X(E); if :E is not compact, than X(I:) could be required to contain 
e.g. all smooth solutions of the constraint equations with 9ii - asymptotically flat (e.g. 
in the sense of Theorem 1.6.2) in the "ends" of I:. If the theorem-to-be-proved holds, 
then the Cauchy data for which uniqueness and/or strong maximality fail are unstable, 
and therefore their existence, though an unpleasant feature, does not seem to be a very 
serious threat to predictability of the theory. There are three possible attitudes to a 
theory in which theorem-to-be-proved does not hold: 
21 0ne could also adopt the point of view, that since there is only one universe accessible to our 
observations, namely the one we live in, it would actually suffice to have Y(E) = X(E) =one point~ 
the Cauchy data for the universe we live in. Such an approach does not seem to be very fruitful. 
g 
1. accept that the theory has poor predictability power, and cannot thus be considered 
as a fundamental one, or 
2. isolate the set of Cauchy data, say Z(E), for which uniqueness and strong maxi­
mality hold, and admit it as a prediction of the theory that no other Cauchy data 
than the ones in Z(E) are admissible, or 
3. renounce the idea, that unique predictability is a basic requirement for any satis­
factory (nonquantum) physical theory. 
Since none of these seems attractive to the author, he will hope for the best, namely that 
the theorem-to-be-proved can be proved indeed. 
Let us recall some of the known results concerning the Cauchy problem for Einstein 
equations. The following theorem, due to Hughes, Kato and Marsden [72], is an im­
provement (as far as the differentiability hypotheses are concerned) of the pioneering 
work by Choquet-Bruhat [49] [17] (followed by some subsequent results by Hawking and 
Ellis [66], and Fischer and Marsden [46]; cf. [24] for an extensive review of this and other 
topics treated here): 
Theorem 1.1.1 (Local existence) Let (E, g, I<) be an init-ial data set for vacuum Ein­
stein equations. Suppose that L: can be (locally finitely) covered by coordinate charts U a, 
C1 related to each other, such that (g,I<) E H!oc(Ua) X H!0::1 (Ua), s > 5/2. Then there 
exists a globally hyperbolic development ( M, 1) of (L:, g, I<), for which E is a Cauchy 
surface, with 1 determined uniquely (up to isometry) by (g, K) 22 • If E is Hausdorff, M 
can be chosen to be Hausdorff. 
This theorem guarantees the existence of some development in which the metric is 
uniquely determined by the data. It also tells us that the space-time constructed in the 
proof will be globally hyperbolic. Recall that ( M, "') is said to be globally hyperbolic if in 
22 Recall that f E H}0 c(U) iffor every conditionally compact subset K of U II f 1\H,(K)< oo, where H, 
are the standard Sobolev spaces, s E JR. s can be taken greater than or equal to 3 in the local existence 
theorem if one prefers integer values of s. 
10 
M there exists a hypersurface 'E with the property that every inextendible causal curve 
meets 'E once and only once. The hypersurface 'E of this definition is called a Cauchy 
surface. The fact that (M, 1) so constructed is globally hyperbolic is welcome since it 
means that M is not "smaller than globally hyperbolic", i.e. "no causal holes" are "dug" 
in M; on the other hand the method of proof does not allow one to construct "larger than 
globally hyperbolic" space-times, i.e. space-times in which Cauchy horizons occur. (The 
notion of global hyperbolicity was first introduced by Leray in a slightly different form 23, 
resulting in his famous theorem that the Cauchy problem for linear hyperbolic systems 
with Cauchy data on a spacelike submanifold of a globally hyperbolic space-time is well 
posed for, say, smooth data, i.e. smooth data evolve to a unique globally defined solution 
on M. Let us also mention that it follows from the theorems of Geroch [57] and Seifert 
[114] that the notion of global hyperbolicity of a space-time coincides with the condition 
of "strict hyperbolicity" of the associated d' Alembert operator, cf. [71] [Volume 3, Chap­
ter 23].) As far as existence and uniqueness of maximal globally hyperbolic developments 
is concerned we have the following result 24 due to Choquet-Bruhat and Geroch [21], with 
some improvements on the differentiability conditions due to Hawking and Ellis [66]: 
Theorem 1.1.2 (Uniqueness of maximal globally hyperbolic Hausdorff de­
velopments) Let 'E be a three dimensional Hausdorff manifold. For every (g, K) E 
Hloc('E) X H~oc('E) there exists a Hausdorff manifold M with a C1~; metr·ic25 1, which is 
maximal in the space of globally hyperbolic Hausdorff developments of (g, K). M is dif­
feomorphic to 'EX IR and (M, 1) is unique (up to diffeomorphisms) in the class of globally 
hyperbolic Hausdorff manifolds (satisfying appropriate differentiability conditions). 
23 When discussing equivalence of various definitions of global hyperbolicity one should be careful 
about the differentiability conditions needed to establish them: the usual causality theory, as presented 
e.g. in [66], requires e11;; metrics (first derivatives of the metric are Lipschitz continuous on conditionally 
compact subsets of coordinate charts); several (and maybe all) essential results can be recovered under 
the differentiability conditions considered in [41]. If the parameter s of the local existence theorem is 
larger than 5/2 the metric will be el~: with an appropriate 0 < a < 1, but not necessarily e/1;~ so that 
the classical results require reexamination, and in fact several results seem not to go through due to 
technical problems. In the case of theorem 1.1.2 the manifold M can certainly be chosen small enough 
to be globally hyperbolic both in the original Leray sense and in the sense described above. 
24 This theorem holds in considerably more general situations than vacuum Einstein equations, cf. [21]. 
25 The metric will actually have more regularity then e11;;, cf. e.g. [20] for details. 
11 
iR: 
Figure l.Ll: The bifurcating real axis. 
Theorem 1.1.2 is unfortunately much weaker than what needs to be proved for "theorem" 
1 to hold: uniqueness and maxima.lity are guaranteed only within the class of Hausdorff 
globally hyperbolic developments, and nothing is said about strong maximality. It is 
easy to see that if one wishes to maintain uniqueness of M, some kind of requirement 
of Hausdorffness-type cannot be avoided: if one drops Hausdorffness altogether then if 
3 :E x lR is a development, the manifold 3 :E x fR will also be a development, where JR is 
the standard non-Hausdorff "bifurcating real axis", Figure 1.1.1, and one can continue 
to produce manifolds with at ieast a countable infinity of different topologies by adding 
new bifurcation branches and removing some. On the other hand allowing some kind of 
weak violation of Hausdorffness - e.g., as proposed by Hajicek, requiring non-existence 
of bifurcate causal curves in the space-time - may restore uniqueness of maximal devel­
opments of the Taub--Newrnan-Unti-Tambourino (Taub-NUT) space-time 26 (cf. e.g. 
[66]). Let us discuss this space-time in some more detail. The Taub-NUT space-time 
is a highly symmetric model for which space-sections are "initially" diffeomorphic to 
.'J3, "initially" meaning "in a neighborhood of some spacelike (S3 ) 0 " on which Cauchy 
data may be given, and these Cauchy data evolve to a space-time the global structure 
of which is well visualized by Figure 1.1.2 [85] [36]. The shaded region in Figure 1.1.2 is 
globally hyperbolic, and for any spacelike S3 lying in this region it turns out to be the 
maximal globally hyperbolic Hausdorff development, as guaranteed by Choquet- Bruhat 
and Geroch. The unshaded region contains dosed timelike geodesics. It can be shown 
[36] that there exist at least two different smooth ways (in fact even analytic) of ai-
26If it were possible to prove uniqueness of all solutions at the price of some form of violation of 
Hausdorffness of the topology of the resulting maximal developments, it could consider this as a predic­
tion of the theory, namely that in some special, maybe highly unstable ( cf. the discussion of Section 4) 
situations, violation of Hausdorffness of space-time occurs. It must be pointed out that it is not known, 
whether Hajicek's non-Hausdorff extension of Taub-NUT space-time [64] is unique. 
12 
\ 
I 
space 
Cauchy horizon 
Figure 1.1.2: Taub-NUT space-time. 
taching the acausal NUT region to the causal Taub region, one obtains in this way two 
non-isometric developments of the Taub region 27 . The "corners" in Figure 1.1.2 at the 
junction of the causal and acausal regions are misleading because both the manifold and 
the metric are smooth at the "junction". They are however correctly illustrating the fact 
that this junction acts as a singular surface for geodesics, the reader is referred to [8.5] 
[66] for more details. Let us note for further use that the hypersurface separating the 
globally hyperbolic region from the rest of the universe is called a Cauchy horizon. A 
similar behaviour is exhibited by the Misner space-time [84] ( cf. also [66]), the globally 
hyperbolic region of which is diffeomorphic to IR x T3 (T3 = 5 1 x 5 1 x 5 1 = the three 
dimensional torus), and in a large class of space-times constructed by Moncrief [88] [89], 
in polarized Gowdy space-times which we discuss in more detail in Section LS; some flat 
space-times with Cauchy horizons are also presented in Appendix D. All these exarnples 
necessitate the proviso of genericity in TTBP. 
The global hyperbolicity condition plays an essential role in the proof of the Choquet-
27It would be of great interest to prove or disprove that the two known extensions are the only 
possibilities with, say, compact horizons. 
13 
Bruhat-Geroch theorem, because no systematic method of solving Einstein's equations 
beyond Cauchy horizons is known ( cf. however [89] [89] in the analytic case). Let us 
also note a discrepancy of differentiability conditions between Theorems 1.1.2 and 1.1.1 
- it is not clear whether it can be removed. One may wonder whether one should 
really worry about this since one often encounters the point of view ( cf. e.g. [66]) that 
we can assume without any loss of physical information that the metric is smooth. The 
argument is, that since we are not able to measure whether a quantity is either smooth or 
C 2 or, say, continuous, then, quantum considerations put apart, one can as well assume 
smoothness of physical fields. It seems that a logical conclusion of such a reasoning should 
be exactly the opposite, namely that in a physical theory one should assume only the 
minimal differentiability conditions under which the theory makes sense; let us illustrate 
this by the following considerations: by a well known result by Whitney [128], ( cf. also 
[129]) every Ck manifold, k ;::: 1, is Ck diffeomorphic to an analytic one, which implies 
that every field on a manifold can be approximated, locally to arbitrary accuracy, by 
analytic fields. Continuing the previously described line of thought, one could thus as 
well assume that all fields are analytic" Such a hypothesis leads immediately to at least 
one erroneous conclusion, namely that the solutions of the field equations are uniquely 
defined everywhere by their value on some open subset: the unique continuation property 
of analytic fields completely obscures the fundamental property of hyperbolic equations, 
that uniqueness of solutions holds within domains of dependence only. Another striking 
example in which completely wrong conclusions are drawn by assuming analyticity of 
fields is given by the Robinson-Trautman space-times (cf. Section 1.7): there exists a 
large family of analytic initial data for a Robinson- Trautman space-time which can be 
evolved both to the future and to the past of the initial surface. On the other hand for 
all data which are smooth but fail to be analytic, a Robinson- Trautman solution of the 
vacuum Einstein equations can exist only either to the future or to the past of the initial 
hypersurface, depending upon the sign of m ( cf. Section 1. 7). This clearly demonstrates 
that restricting oneself to analytic fields may be rather misleading. Analycity put apart, 
we wish moreover to point out that the assumption of global smoothness of solutions may 
14 
be simply inconsistent with vacuum Einstein equations, or, more generally, with Einstein 
equations coupled with matter fields the energy-momentum tensor of which satisfies some 
positivity conditions. This is due to the possibility of breakdown of differentiability of 
the metric in the course of evolution 28 • In order to discuss this in more detail, let us first 
turn to the basic question, what are the most general conditions under which Einstein 
equations make sense. The Ricci tensor may be written in the form 
where A and B are expressions of the form 
where g-1 stands for the tensor g~-'v inverse to the metric tensor g,..v. I£29 g E Hioc(M) 
and g- 1 E Lloc(.M), the "distributional equation" 
'ic/1~-'" f {o;,c/J~'v A~"-¢~-'" B,..v} = 0 jM 
is well defined, with ¢11 v- symmetric C1 tensor density of compact support ( cf. [41] and. 
[60] for a discussion of some properties of such metrics). This class of metrics is much 
larger than the one considered in the existence theorem. As long as the metric does 
not leave this class during evolution, one can interpret Einstein equations in the above 
sense30 . In the theory of partial differential equations it is often much easier to prove 
existence of some weak generalized solutions than to prove existence of solutions with 
high regularity and therefore existence of such weakly differentiable metrics seems highly 
plausible 31 . The problem with this kind of solutions is their potential non-uniqueness 
and it is likely that with such weak conditions the theorem-to-be-proved may not hold. 
--,.~-------------
28cf. [116] for an example of evolution equations in which smooth initial data cease to be differentiable 
during evolution, while globally defined weak solutions exist (the weak solutions fail, however, to be 
unique [117]). The example studied by Shatah may be of some relevance to our discussion, because 
harmonic maps are related to Einstein equations, cf. e.g [90] [87]. 
29 It is worthwile noting that similar conditions arise naturally when studying the problem of weakest 
possible conditions for finite and well defined ADM mass, cf. e.g. [5]. 
30 0ne cannot exclude the possibility of being able in the future to formulate Einstein equations in an 
even larger class of metrics. 
31 A standard approximation argument should show the existence part of theorem 2.1 holds with (g, K) 
in H!oc x H;'::1, s > 3/2 (the resulting space-time metric will actually be still more regular than the 
requirements of well posedness of distributional Einstein equations pointed out above). 
15 
/big crunch 
t time 
'big bang 
Figure 1.2.1: Friedman-Robertson-Walker space-time. 
1.2 Singularities? 
Although of fundamental importance, the Choquet-Bruhat-Geroch theorem gives only 
very poor information (global hyperbolicity, Hausdorffness) about the structure of the 
space-time whose existence and uniqueness it guarantees. An especially unpleasant fea­
ture of some maximal solutions of Einstein equations is the potential failure of strong 
maximality, i.e. existence of extensions to space-times on which there is no way of en­
suring satisfaction of field equations. The possibility of existence of such extensions leads 
us to the question, what global properties generic solutions possess, and therefore to 
the problem of singularities. Soon after Einstein's theory had been formulated it was 
realized that Einstein's equations led to formation of singularites (cf. [123] for a review 
of the history of the problem). A standard example of such an occurence is given by the 
Friedman-Robertson-Walker metrics on 1R x 53 evolving from the "big bang" singularity 
to the "big crunch" singularity, cf. Figure 1.2. In this crude cosmological model Einstein 
theory describes very precisely what will happen to the inhabitants of the universe: in fi­
nite proper time they will be crushed to zero volume by infinite gravitational forces. One 
can rightly raise the objection, that the assumed dust model fails to describe physical re­
ality near the singularities-- to avoid such discussions we shall from now on restrict our 
16 
attention to vacuum Einstein equations. The question whether singularities generically 
occur in vacuum Einstein gravity has intrigued physicists for years, the general belief 
being that this problem has been satisfactorily settled by Penrose and Hawking in their 
celebrated singularity theorems. Let us present 32 one of those [67] [66]: 
Theorem 1.2.1 (Hawking-Penrose Singularity Theorem) Suppose that B is a com­
pact three dimensional manifold, let (g, K) be Cauchy data which admit C1~; develop­
ments, let (M,1) be any development in the C1~; differentiability class and suppose that 
(M,1) satisfies a genericity condition (for details, cf. {67] {66]). Then either 
1. (JYf,1) contains a Cauchy horizon beyond which closed timelike curves occur, or 
2. ( M, 1) is geodesically incomplete. 
'vVe shall not discuss in detail what "generic data" means in this context, let us just 
mention that there is hope (and some evidence) that the hypothesis of genericity can be 
removed by adding a third possibility, namely that ( M, 1) splits isometrically as lR x B3 , 
with B3 -flat ( c.f. [100] [55] and references therein). 1) seems to be a very interesting 
prediction of general relativity - we have seen an example of such a behaviour in the 
Taub-NUT space-time. We have chosen the somewhat artificial dynamical formulation 
of the above theorem to emphasize that there is no causality violation in a neighborhood 
of the hypersurface :E, the closed timelike curves "develop" beyond Cauchy horizons, 
in particular the timelike loops which develop in Taub-NUT space-time beyond, say, a 
future Cauchy horizon, do not allow for any interference with the past of the observers on 
the other side of the horizon. It is widely believed that generically the second part of the 
alternative occurs, namely existence of incomplete geodesics. The problem with point 2) 
is, as already pointed out by Hawking and Penrose [67], that though it leaves one with the 
feeling that something goes wrong, it doesn't say what actually is going wrong. In view 
of the weak differentiability conditions for existence of solutions of Einstein equations, 
32 0ne would expect that the conditon of genericity of (M, 1) required below might hold for generic 
Cauchy data, but this remains to be proved. 
17 
not to mention well posedness of the distributional equations, this theorem completely 
fails to indicate whether we are really going to face a situation in which either Einstein 
equations will fail or some other unwanted physical phenomena will occur. A breakdown 
of C1~; character of the metric may lead to a blow up of the Riemann tensor 33 , but even 
this need not be accompanied by any extremely unpleasant physical effects. A simple 
way of analyzing the effects of curvature on matter is via tidal forces induced by gravity, 
the effect of which is given by an integral of some components of the Riemann tensor 
along world lines. If the blow up preserves finiteness of such integrals no extraordinary 
physical effects will be observed. Rather than interpreting this theorem as a breakdown 
of general relativity, one can think of it as evidence for the need of considering weakly 
differentiable metrics. There is little doubt that some singularities that occur in general 
relativity cannot be removed by the introduction of coordinate systems in which the 
metric is only weakly differentiable, and it is important to isolate those from the other 
kind. Rather than having a theorem telling us that something goes wrong, one would 
like to have a result which tells us exactly what goes wrong, e.g.: 
Theorem-to-be-proved 2 (TTBP-2) Suppose that :E is a three dimensional Rie­
mannian manifold, let (g,K) E X(E), X(E) as in TTBP and let (M,1) be a maximal 
development of (:E, g, K). For all/most/some r 's, where r is either 
1. a past/future incomplete inextendible timelike geodesic, or· 
2. a past/future incomplete inextendible null geodesic34 , or 
3. a finite total acceleration future/past inextendible timelike curve of finite proper 
length, i.e. a curve for which (s - proper time along r) 
f D2 x~" D2 x" 
Jr9JL"--;[;2d;2ds < oo. 
4. a past/future inextendible timelike curve of finite proper length, 
33Some results of this kind have been established by Clarke [41] [123) under supplementary hypotheses. 
34 If the metric is not C 1, a geodesic may eventually be defined as a curve possessing some extremal 
properties in appropriate classes of curves. 
it holds that 
??? 
The "finite total acceleration" curves are interesting, because they may be thought to 
represent observers which have at their disposition a finite amount of fuel for their rocket's 
engine. It is not to be excluded that in generic situations "a lot of'' geodesics will be 
complete either to the future, or to the past, or both. 
Let us emphasize that the analysis of what goes wrong along incomplete geodesics is 
relevant to TTBP, at least in the e11;; differentiability class of metrics, because of the 
following inextendability criterion: 
A Maximality Criterion: Let 1 be a e11;; Lorentzian metric on M. If on every 
incomplete timelike geodesic in M some curvature scalar blows up, then ( M, 1) is strongly 
maximal in the class of Lorentzian space-times with el;; metrics. 
It follows that a proof of curvature blow-up is a useful step in the proof of TTBP. It 
should be noted that the above criterion also shows that a geodesically complete space­
time is necessarily maximal in the class of space-times with e1~; metrics. The lack of 
criteria for inextendibility for Lorentzian metrics in weak differentiability classes is at the 
origin of our inability to exclude extensions which are not e11;;. For instance, it is not 
known whether e.g. Minkowski space-time can or cannot be extended to a larger manifold 
with a continuous Lorentzian metric, though such a possibility seems rather unlikely to 
the author. This, and some other inextendability criteria, are proved in Appendix C.2. 
1.3 Strong Cosmic Censorship? 
One often encounters the opinion, that an important issue in general relativity is to 
establish the validity of the strong cosmic censorship, a hypothesis formulated by Penrose 
[103] ( cf. also [70][Section 5.4]), which can tentatively be formulated as follows: 
19 
Strong Cosmic Censorship Conjecture (SCCC): Every maximal Hausdorff devel­
opment of a generic Cauchy data set (L,,g,K), with (L,,g)- compact or asymptotically 
.flat, is globally hyperbolic 35 • 
This conjecture is often formulated in the Cf;: context, and a breakdown of C1~; differen­
tiability class of the metric on a globally hyperbolic manifold is considered as a breakdown 
of validity of the conjecture. Note that by the Choquet--Bruhat-Geroch theorem there 
is only one globally hyperbolic development, thus SCCC implies uniqueness in generic 
situations. The supposed importance of this conjecture is motivated by the belief that 
1. a failure of cl;: differentiability of the metric implies necessarily a breakdown of 
predictability of Einstein theory (non-uniqueness of solutions in the large), and 
2. non-global hyperbolicity means existence of Cauchy horizons, and it is believed 
that there is no physically reasonable class of space-times in which one can uniquely 
solve Einstein equations beyond the Cauchy horizon. 
As we have emphasized in the previous sections, we have no convincing evidence that 1) 
is justified. We have purposefully stated the SCCC without making the differentiability 
conditions explicit to simply disregard 1) and concentrate on 2). Let us recall some facts 
about compact Cauchy horizons: Isenberg and Moncrief have shown [75], under some 
technical conditions which can probably be removed, that an analytic space-time with 
a compact Cauchy horizon must admit a non--trivial isometry group. Moncrief [88] [89] 
has studied the analytic Cauchy problem posed on an analytic U ( 1) symmetric horizon 
with S3 and T 3 topology and has shown that this problem is well posed: more precisely, 
by proving a singular version of the Cauchy-Kowa.levskaya theorem, he has shown that 
there exists a unique analytic development of appropriate analytic data on the horizon 
both into the causal and, what interests us more here, into the acausal region. It is 
not known whether this result is a pure accident of analyticity, or reflects the possibility 
35It should be stressed that we do not include the notion of global hyperbolicity in the definition of 
developement, cf. the beginning of Section 1.1. 
20 
that the problem of evolving say, smooth data into the acausal region is well posed. 
Let us just point out at this stage that solvability of the analytic Cauchy problem is 
usually an excellent starting point for the proof of solvability of the smooth or the Hs 
Cauchy problem - what is needed is some kind of a priori estimates. If one could 
establish generic unique solvability beyond those Cauchy horizons which can occur m 
space-times containing compact or asymptotically flat space-like hypersurfaces, it setms 
that this formulation of SCCC would cease to be a fundamental issue. To the author's 
knowledge, no conclusive study of this problem has been undertaken yet. It must be 
noted that it follows from the proofs of the Penrose-Hawking theorems [67] [66] that 
causality violations will occur beyond Cauchy horizons. As emphasized previously, in no 
way does this lead to causality problems in the globally hyperbolic regions, and ending 
in an acausal region does not seem to be a worse fate for a universe than ending in a big 
crunch. It is often argued, quite convincingly (for references cf. e.g. [103]), that Cauchy 
horizons will be unstable (cf. also [91]). Whatever the status of generic solvability of 
Einstein equations beyond Cauchy horizons, it would be of interest to isolate the set of 
Cauchy data which lead to formation of Cauchy horizons: 
Theorem-to-be-proved 3 (TTBP-3) Let~, X(~), Y(~), M(~) be as in TTBP. Let 
XH(~) be the set of Cauchy data for which Cauchy h01·izons occu1·. Then 
1. X(~) \ XH(~) is dense and open ???, 
2. The intersection XH(~) n Y(~) is empty ??? is dense in XH(~) ??? is equal to 
XH(~) for appropriatedly chosen M(~) ??? 
We would like to emphasize once a.gain that 
e if it were convincingly demonstrated that there is no sense in which one can have 
generic unique solvability of Einstein equations beyond the kind of Cauchy horizons 
which can occur by evolution from asymptotically fiat or spatially compact initial 
data, then SCCC would be of fundamental importance to Einstein's theory of 
gravitation. Its failure would imply that TTBP does not hold. 
21 
• If generic unique solvability beyond Cauchy horizons as above can be established, 
SCCC becomes an interesting but not fundamental problem. 
This last possibility seems to be highly unlikely to most authors ( cf., however, (50] and 
[95]). 
1.4 (Weak) Cosmic Censorship? 
Another famous conjecture due to Penrose [10.5] is the so-called (weak) cosmic censorsh-ip 
hypothesis (w.c.c.), which expresses the hope that for generic collapsing isolated gravita­
tional systems the singularities that might develop will be hidden beyond a smooth event 
horizon ( cf. also [70] [123] [66] for discussion, and for various technical formulations of 
the problem). Since 1976 the following examples of naked singularity formation have 
been found, we list them in chronological order of appearence: 
1. Yodzis, Seifert and Muller zum Hagen have shown that "naked singularities" may 
occur during the collapse of spherically symmetric dust [131] (T1w = puJ.tuv, with 
lJ.t"uJLuv = -1, where TJ.tv is the energy-momentum tensor), or of spherically sym­
metric perfect fluids [131] [97] (Tp.v = (p+ p)up.uv + PIJ.tv' lJL''u!Lu" = -1 ), for a large 
class of equations of state p = p(p). These are the so-called "shell-crossing" sin­
gularities, which arise because of crossing of shells of matter, and their occurrence 
is stable under spherically symmetric perturbations [97]. 
2. Steinmuller, King and Lasota [122) have noted that naked singularities can form 
during a radiative collapse of a star emitting "null36 dust" (TIL" = (p + p)up.Uv + 
P/p.v + tkp.kv, IJ.tvuJ.tuv = -1, IJ.tvkJ.tk" = 0), in a family of metrics considered by 
Demiariski and Lasota [42]. 
3. Hiscock, Williams and Eardley have shown [68] that the implosion of null dust 
(TJ.tv = tkJLkv, IJ.tvkJ.t kv = 0) can lead to the formation of so-called "shell-focusing" 
36 A "null dust" can be obtained from e.g. a geometric optics approximation to a massless scalar field. 
22 
naked singularities 37 (the same result has been noticed independently by Papa­
petrou in (102], cf. also [125] and references therein for more information about 
these singularities). 
4. Christodoulou has proved that the collapse of spherically symmetric dust (p=O) 
can also lead to the formation of a central naked singularity [25] of "shell-focusing" 
type; numerical evidence suggesting that this might occur has been previously 
obtained by Eardley and Smarr [43] ( cf. also [98] for more information about 
these singularities). Numerical results of Ori and Piran [101] suggest that central 
naked singularities may also form for perfect fluids with equation of state p = Kp, 
""=const. 
5. Shapiro and Teukolsky [115] have presented numerical evidence suggesting that 
axially symmetric collapse of the Einstein- Vlasov system may lead to formation 
of naked singularities, and that this behaviour is stable under axially symmetric 
perturbations. 
6. In his recent analysis of a self-gravitating massless scalar field, Christodoulou has 
shown [27] that generic initial data (of BMO class, prescribed on an outgoing light 
cone, cf. [27] for details), do not lead to the formation of naked singularities (thus 
both w.c.c. and also TTBP hold for the spherically symmetric Einstein-massless 
scalar field problem). He has also shown that there exists a set of codimension 1 of 
initial data for which naked singularities will occur. 
It must be stressed that all the examples above suffer from the drawback of not being re­
alistic, and from all of them Christodoulou's scalar field seems to be the most acceptable 
one. The deficiencies of the numerical results are 1) the problem of numerical uncertain­
ties arising when approaching the singularity, and 2) the difficulty of deciding, on the 
basis of a numerical solution of finite space extent and obtained only up to some finite 
37There are some reasons to believe that the central "shell-focusing" singularities are "worse" than the 
shell crossing ones, cf. [99] for details; the status of these assertions does not seem to be clear. 
23 
value of time, whether or not the solution in question has ari event horizon38 (recall that 
an event horizon is defined in terms of asymptotic structure [66], and thus in terms of the 
behaviour of the solution as both the space and time variables tend to infinity). The only 
result above which does not assume spherical symmetry is the one due to Shapiro and 
Teukolsky, and it has been pointed out by Rendall [108] that the presumed occurrence 
of a naked singularity might be an artefact of the singular character of the initial data 39 
assumed for the Vlasov field in (115]. To give support to his suggestion Rendall draws 
attention to the recent results of Pfaffelmoser [106], who has shown that the Poisson­
Vlasov system (which is the Newtonian equivalent of the Einstein-Vlasov system) has 
global solutions for smooth data, while the numerical results of Shapiro and Teukolsky 
show that some solutions of the Poisson- Vlasov system with Dirac-5-type initial data 
blow up in finite time. 
The original motivation for the formulation of the w.c.c conjecture seems to be the expec­
tation, that formation of singularities may lead to unpredictability, i.e. non-uniqueness 
of solutions. If w.c.c. holds, then the potential regions of non-uniqueness will be hidden 
beyond event horizons, and predictability in the exterior world will be saved. This atti­
tude is similar in spirit to that of TTBP, with the difference however that TTBP insists 
on predictability throughout the space-time. Clearly if one adopts the attitude that the 
main point of w.c.c. is predictability, then a proof of TTBP will make w.c.c. irrele­
vant. One might of course consider that a significant part of w.c.c. is the requirement of 
smoothness of the metric on the event horizon, or maybe even in a neighbourhood of the 
event horizon, in which case w.c.c. and TTBP may contain only partially overlapping 
information. 
It should be noted that a rather different "curvature strength" approach to the w.c.c. 
problem has been initiated by Krolak and Newman, cf. [80] [99] [llO]. 
38In spherically symmetric situations with matter with a sharp imploding boundary this problem does 
not arise because by Birkhoff's theorem the metric is the Schwarzschild one in the vacuum region; no 
such information is available if spherical symmetry is not assumed. 
39 Shapiro and Teukolsky model the Vlasov field by a swarm of particles, which corresponds to initial 
data for the Vlasov function f which are a sum of Dirac tJ functions. 
24 
1.5 Some answers, in spatially compact space-times 
with two or more spacelike Killing vector fields. 
TTBP, TTBP2 and TTBP3 seem to be a formidable challenge to analysts, and it must 
be said that the possibility of establishing them in the near future seems to be rather 
remote. When facing a difficult problem it is usually believed that insight can be gained 
by studying it under certain restrictive assumptions, and the obvious idea is to consider 
'f' 
space-times with Cauchy data invariant under a smooth action of a group. The ideal 
would be to assume the smallest possible isometry group - U(l) or JR. Although sev­
eral remarkable simplifications occur in such space-times ( cf. [90] and [16]) this problem 
also seems to be out of reach at the time of writing this review. Let us thus take the 
reverse approach, and start with the largest possible isometry group. In the remainder 
of this Section we shall consider the cosmological vacuum space-times only, unless ex­
plicitely specified otherwise, i.e. space-times which develop out of a compact, connected, 
orientable Cauchy surface. All possible groups acting on such manifolds have been listed 
by Fischer ([45], p. 334), cf. Table 1.0.1, p .. 5, let us examine Fischer's list one by one: 
1. G = S0(4) or 80(3) x S0(3): it follows from the equations on p. 471 of [126] that 
no such vacuum metrics exist; 
2. G = (U(l) x SU(2))/ D, D = {(1, 1), ( -1, -1)}, or G = U(l) x 80(3), acting on 
lens spaces (recall that S3 is a lense space: 8 3 = L(l, 1)): as shown in Section 2.2, 
the Taub-NUT metrics exhaust the space of metrics with this symmetry group, 
thus TTBP certainly does not hold in this "minisuperspace" of metrics: all the 
maximal globally hyperbolic space-times in this class are non-uniquely extendible 
both to the future and to the past of the Cauchy surface ( cf. [36] for a detailed 
discussion); 
3. G = U(l) x 80(3) acting on S1 x 82 : by a generalization of the Birkhoff theorem 
( cf. Section 2.3) all such metrics are, locally, isometric to the "r, 2m" Schwarzschild 
metric. It follows that the maximal globally hyperbolic development is inextendible 
25 
either to the future or to the past of the Cauchy surface, beca~se of the r = 0 
Schwarzschild singularity, and extendible either to the past or to the future of the 
Cauchy surface, because of the Schwarzschild event horizon r = 2m; thus TTBP 
"half-holds" in this space of metrics; 
4. G = SU(2) or S0(3) with three dimensional principal orbits: these are the so­
called Bianchi IX space-times. In spite of the fad that these space--times have 
been studied by several authors (d. (12] and references therein; cf. also [81] for 
some recent results) no information of the kind looked for in TTBP - TTBP2 -
TTBP3 seems to be available. The general belief seems to be that all such space­
times except for the Taub-NUT family are curvature singular 40 both to the future 
and to the past of the Cauchy surface; 
5. G = S0(3) with two dimensional principal orbits: as discussed in Section 2.3, 
the generalized Birkhoff theorem shows that these metrics are, locally, the interior 
Schwarzschild metric 4\ 
6. G = U(l) x U(l) x U(l) acting on T 3 - these are the so-called Bianchi I space­
times, which we discuss in detail in the Section 2.4. The picture that emerges 
is the following: generic maximal space-times in this class are globally hyperbolic 
and contain incomplete causal geodesics, however on those some scalars constructed 
out of curvature blow up to infinity, which shows that generic space-times of this 
class are inextendible in the C'1~; class of metrics, and which gives a version of 
TTBP2. Only a "zero measure set" of Bianchi I space-times contains horizons, 
therefore TTBP holds (in the class of Hausdorff Lorentzian manifolds with C'1~; 
40There is an ongoing discussion whether the Bianchi IX dynamical system is chaotic or not; and 
it has even been claimed [12] that the orbits of the Bianchi IX system asymptotically tend to orbits 
of a dynamical system which contains a strange attractor. These assertions about chaos in Bianchi 
IX metrics do not seem to be sufficiently justified. Let us also mention that the positive Lyapunov 
exponents criterion of chaos, which is sometimes claimed to be fulfilled in Bianchi IX space-times [10] 
[15] ( cf however [69] for an opposite point of view) seems to be irrelevant for dynamical systems on 
non-compact manifolds (which is the case for Bianchi IX space-times). It would be of great interest to 
give a mathematically rigorous analysis of whether Bianchi IX cosmologies are chaotic or not. 
41 This excludes the S3 and P 3 spatial topologies listed by Fischer, cf. Section 2.3. 
26 
metrics). Nothing is known about the possibility (or the impossibility) of extending 
the metrics as solutions of field equations beyond the "curvature singularities", 
whenever they occur, in some weaker differentiability class of space-times. Since 
all the Bianchi I metrics are analytic they can be analytically extended as vacuum 
metric> beyond the Cauchy horizons (which can always be assumed to be compact), 
whenever they occur; the extensions fail to be unique, as in the Taub-NUT case. 
Thus, as we see, vacuum spatially compact space-times for which the dimension of the 
isometry group is larger than or equal to three are fairly well understood, the only case 
in which our knowledge is unsatisfactory being the general Bianchi IX metrics. There is 
no doubt that this last case deserves a careful analysis, from a dynamical point of view 
it seems, however, more interesting to study space-times in which the dimension of the 
maximal isometry group is less than or equal to two: in all the cases listed above the 
dynamics reduces to ODE's rather than PDE's, and one is left with the feeling of missing 
something fundamental by turning wave phenomena off. One can therefore expect that 
more insight can be gained by studying those space-times for which the isometry group 
is the next group on Fischer's list, namely G2 = U(l) x U(1) 42 • In the remainder of 
this section we shall consider space-times which evolve from a Cauchy data set (1;, g, K) 
symmetric under a G2 action, namely: 
1. 1; is a manifold which admits a differentiable action of a G2 , and 
2. (g, K) are invariant under G2 • 
It follows that in any development of (1;, g, K) there is a neighborhood of :E on which 
G2 acts by isometries, and in which the orbits of G2 are spacelike. Such space-times 
have played an important role in the development of general relativity: the cylindrically 
symmetric Einstein-Rosen space-times [79] provided the first non-perturbative arena 
to discuss gravitational radiation, the "boost-rotation" symmetric space-times were the 
first example of asymptotically flat radiating space-times ( cf. [11] and references therein), 
42The only remaining possibility on the list. given in [45] is G = U(l). 
27 
the IR x 1R symmetric plane waves of Kahn and Penrose [77] gave the first example of 
singularity formation without spherical symmetry, finally Gowdy [61] used U(l) X U(l) 
symmetric metrics to exhibit radiation phenomena in spatially dosed space-times. There 
has been recently a renewal of interest in these space-times, because of many interesting 
properties and because they have not been studied with sufficient detail and rigour in the 
original papers. One should mention a careful reexamination of the radiative properties 
of the boost-rotation symmetric space-times by Bicak and Schmidt [11], a study of plane 
waves by Ernst and Hauser [44], and an exhaustive study of polarized Gowdy metrics by 
Isenberg and Moncrief [76] which we shall discuss in more detail below. It is also worth 
mentioning some studies of polarized Gowdy metrics in the quantum gravity context, 
e.g. some recent work by Husain and Smolin [73]. 
Before presenting in detail the results on polarized Gowdy metrics derived in Refs. [76], 
[37] and [35], let us recall a few facts about G2 isometric space-times. If :E is a compact 
manifold on which a topological group acts effectively, then G must be a compact Lie 
group. It may be shown that if G2 is the maximal isometry group of the metric, then 
G2 = U(l) x U(l) (otherwise the real isometry group of the metric would be larger). It is 
also a standard result that if a compact connected orientable three dimensional manifold 
is acted upon by G = U(l) x U(l ), then :E = T3 or S3 or a lens space L(p, q) or S2 x S\ 
and the action of G is unique up to diffeomorphisms. Metrics on L(p, q) can be identified 
with metrics on S3 and need not be discussed separately in the applications we shall be 
concerned with here. The "polarized Gowdy space-times" form a small but non-trivial 
subset of the set of metrics on which U(l) x U(l) acts by isometries on spacelike Cauchy 
surfaces. By definition for these space-times a coordinate system exists such that the 
metric takes the form 
(1.5.1) 
Op.ga = 0 . 
28 
In the S3 or S2 x 81 case these metrics can be characterized as all U(l) x U(l) symmetric 
metrics for which 
(1.5.2) 
where X a , a = 1,2 are appropriate Killing vectors; in the T3 case they can be character­
ized by (1.5.2) and the requirement Ca = 0, where the constants Ca are defined in (1.5.3). 
We have the following result [37J: 
Theorem 1.501 (Global structure of maximally developed polarized Gowdy 
spacetimes) Let X(.E) = {(g, K) E COO(.E) X COO(.E)}43, with (.E,g, K) - Cauchy data 
for a polarized Gowdy metric,. 
@ Let.E::::::! T3. There exists an open dense subset Y (.E) of X (.E) such that, for every 
(g, K) in Y(.E), there exists a globally hyperbolic Hausdorff development (111, I), 
M ::::::! IR )< T 3 , and a time orientation of (111, I) with the following properties: 
1. on every past directed in extendible timelike curve the scalar ROi (3,6HJI(3,o uni­
f01'mly tends to infinity in finite pmper time (in particular (M, I) is past 
inextendible 44. in the set of Hausdorff manifolds with metrics oj Cl~; difJer­
entiability class), 
2. I) is future geodesically complete (in particular (M, I) is future ine:r-
tendible in the set of Hausdorff manifolds with mdrics of CI~; differentiability 
class}. 
t!il Let .E ~ S3 or r; ::::::! S2 X S1. The1'c exists an open dense subset Y(.E) of X(.E), 
with the property that for all Cauchy data in Y(.E) there exists a globally hyperbolic 
Hausdorff development (M, I) for which on every past directed in extendible timelike 
43Several claims of this theorem hold under much weaker differentiability conditions, which we shall not 
discuss here because the main issue - the proof of inextendability - requires Cl~~ differentiability, and 
as far as Theorem 1.5.1 is concerned no new phenomena arise when assuming some Sobolev conditions 
on the initial data consistent with cl~; differentiability of the metric instead of Coo data. 
44By this we mean that in any extension M' of M the implication (p E III' and p E J- (E)) => (p E M) 
holds. 
29 
curve the Riemann tensor blows to infinity both in the future and in the past in finite 
proper time (in particular (M,,) is in extendible in the set of Hausdorff manifolds 
with metrics of CI~; differentiability class}. 
It should be emphasized that this theorem ensures generic maximality and uniqueness 
within the CI~; class, not only the globally hyperbolic Cl~; class - the global hyperbol­
icity of the maximal extensions follows from the theorem. Inextendibility in a space of 
metrics of weaker differentiability class is not known. This theorem is "TTBP" for this 
class of metrics and gives some information of the kind looked for in TTBP2. It seems 
to be the most precise singularity theorem known for a reasonably large class of metrics, 
especially in view of the sharp estimates on the blow up rates of the Riemann tensor 
one can obtain from the results proved in [76]. Theorem 1.5.1 shows, that in the 53 or 
52 X 51 case the vacuum U(1) x U(1) symmetric picture is, generically, essentially the 
same as in the Friedman-Robertson-Walker dust-filled cosmological model, i.e. the "big 
hang to big crunch" scenario holds. 
In the polarized Gowdy class one can obtain [37] [35] almost exhaustive information 
about the extendible metrics. Let us consider the T3 case first. It should be noted that 
causal future geodesic completeness (and thus future inextendability) actually holds for 
all polarized Gowdy spacetimes with T3 spatial sections, so that nothing remarkable 
happens for large t. On the other hand several interesting phenomena occur at the 
boundary t = O. For all Cauchy data (g, I<) in a certain nonempty closed subspace 
of X(:E) \ Y(E) the maximal globally hyperbolic development has the property that 
RcJl{3,oR,,{3,5 is bounded on AI. For such (M,,) there exist at least two non isometric 
manifolds (IVIa, ,a), a = 1,2, with Coo metrics in which 1\t[ can be isometrically embedded 
in such a way that M a \ M is a Cauchy horizon 45 • In this case a necessary condition 
for existence of vacuum extensions (Ma"a) in the polarized Gowdy class is analycity of 
(M,,): thus if smooth Cauchy data out of which a compact Cauchy horizon develops 
are not analytic, there will be no vacuum polarized Gowdy extension. This result is 
45 JI,{ a denotes the closure of M in Ma. 
30 
not as strong as one would wish since it does not exclude vacuum extensions which are 
not in the polarized Gowdy dass. One can also show existence of Cauchy data out of 
which non-compact Cauchy horizons develop: a particularly interesting class of metrics 
can be constructed in which the Cauchy horizon has a countable infinity of connected 
components, across every one of which the metric can be extended as a solution of the 
vacuum Einstein equations in two inequivalent ways. One obtains in this way maximal 
globally hyperbolic spacetimes which admit a countable infinity of inequivalent vacuum 
extensions [36]. 
In the S2 x S1 and S3 very similar results Hold, the only essential difference is, that 
on S3 no compact Cauchy horizons are possible in this class of metrics. On S2 >< S1 
polarized Gowdy space-times with a compact Cauchy horizon can be shown to exist, in 
such a case the Cauchy horizon must lie to one side of the Cauchy surface only, i.e. if 
the Cauchy horizon has a compact, non-empty, connected component to, say, the future 
of 3 2::, then R01 (3"~sRafJ-rti tends to infinity uniformly on all past incomplete causal curves. 
Again a necessary and sufficient condition for vacuum extendability is analycity of the 
Cauchy data when a compact Cauchy horizon is present. Non-compact Cauchy horizons 
are possible both in the S3 and S2 X S1 case; for both topologies there exist space­
times for which the Cauchy horizon has connected components both to the future and 
to the past of the Cauchy surface; for both topologies the Cauchy horizon may have an 
infinite number of connected components, and, finally, an infinite number of inequivalent 
vacuum extensions is possible for a large family of polarized Gowdy space-times with S3 
or S2 x S1 space sections. 
Since polarized Gowdy metrics are of "zero measure" in the space of all Gowdy metrics, 
a natural question to ask is what happens if one relaxes the polarization condition. Let 
us recall some general features of vacuum metrics with two commuting Killing vectors 
Xa, a= 1, 2. In such a space-time one can form two scalar functions 
( 1.5.3) 
31 
and one shows that in vacuum (58] the ca's must be constant. It follows immediately 
from this and the definition of the ca's that if there is a symmetry axis (i.e. a subset 
on which one of the Killing vectors vanishes) then the Ca 's must both vanish (since they 
are constant and since the right hand side of (1.5.3) vanishes on the axis, they must 
vanish when axes occur) if the space--time is connected (they may, of course, also vanish 
if no symmetry axes exist). A space-time in which the ca's vanish will be called a 
Gowdy space-time. In this case Einstein equations simplify considerably and it can be 
shown that they reduce to a system of equations which can either be interpreted as a 
harmonic map from a three dimensional space-time to the two-dimensional hyperboloid 
H2 of constant curvature [32] [87], or a harmonic map from a two-dimensional space­
time to the same target space with a "source term". (A map rp : M -+ N between two 
Riemannian (or pseudo-Riemannian) manifolds (M,g), (N, h) is called harmonic if it is 
a formal stationary point of the "energy" integral: 
Once the harmonic map problem is solved, the components of the metric are obtained 
either by algebraic manipulations or by line integrals. In the T 3 problem one is left to 
study a simple generalization of the harmonic map equations from IR x 81 to H2 when 
both ca's vanish, and we have the following results (the first part of this theorem is due 
to Moncrief [87]; the second is proved in Chapter 3): 
Theorem 1.5.2 (U(l) x U(l) stability of the singularity of the (p1,p 2 , = 
(~, ~, -~) Kasner metric) Suppose that :8 ~ T3, set X(:S) = {(g, K) E H2 (:S) x H1 (:S), 
with (:S,g, I<) -Cauchy data for a Gowdy space-time}. One can choose a tirne orien­
tation on :8 in such a 1nay that: 
(:S,g,K) 
which can be cove·red by a family Cauchy hypersurfaces :S71 T E such that 
lirn,._.00 d(:Sn E) = oo, where d is the Lorentzian distance between sets, 
32 
2. there exists E > 0 such that for all initial data satisfying II (g- go, K- Ko) llx < f 
where (g0 , Ko) are Cauchy data for a Kasner metric with exponents (Pt, P2, p3) = 
G, ~' -!), there exists a globally hyperbolic Hausdorff development of (g, I<) for 
which on every past directed past inextendibile timelike curve the scalar !R'"'i3'Y5 R"'/3-rsl 
tends to infinity in finite proper time (thus ( M,;) is future inextendible in the class 
of Hausdorff manifolds with C1~: metrics). 
This theorem is almost the equivalent of theorem 1.5.1 for general Gowdy metrics on T3 
with small initial data 46 - future inextendability is missing, though strongly suggested 
by 1 above. When I: = S3 or S 2 x S 1 additional difficulties occur because the space of 
orbits of the isometry group is not a manifold. These have been recently overcome in a 
related model by Christodoulou [28], namely for non-linear Einstein-Rosen waves47 : 
Theorem 1.5.3 (Geodesic completeness of (non-linear) Einstein-Rosen space­
times) Let :E ~ JR3 . For all cylindrically symmetric (g,K) E X(I:) = {(g,I<) E 
H~oc(I:) x H~oc(:E), (g, K) satisfying certain decay conditions 48 for large r} there exists a 
• 
unique globally hyperbolic, timelike and null geodesically complete (and therefore strongly 
maximal), Hausdorff development. 
One of the steps of the proof of Theorem 1.5.3 is to show that the constraint equations 
imply non-existence of trapped surfaces in I: ( cf. (32][Corollary 5.2]). This is a necessary 
condition for null geodesic completeness, as follows from a well-known singularity theo­
rem due to Penrose (66). Using the methods of proof of Theorem 1.5.2 and the results 
proved by Christodoulou one can via a "patching method" establish some properties of 
the maximally developped Gowdy space-times with topology lR x S3 and lR x S1 x S2 , 
cf. [32]. The up tD date known results are not as sharp as theorems 1.5.1-1.5.2. 
46 0ne can also establish "probably generic" existence of singularities in the past without restriction 
on the size of the data [38], these results do not however have such a simple formulation as the ones 
presented here for small data. 
47It should be stressed that theorem 1.5.3 is concerned with the nonlinear Einstein-Rosen metrics, 
and not the "polarized" ones in which the evolution equations reduce to a linear equation. 
33 
1.6 Spatially open space-times: some small data 
results. 
In cosmological considerations one often assumes the existence of compact spacelike hy­
persurfaces. However, ·when studying isolated gravitational systems, E cannot be as­
sumed compact. On non-compact manifolds a natural class of metrics which describe 
isolated gravitating systems are the asymptotically flat metrics - in a sense to be made 
precise in Theorems 1.6.1 and 1.6.2- and under the hypothesis of asymptotic flatness the 
only known results concerning global properties of "big classes" of solutions of Einstein 
equations are 
1. the results on Robinson- Trautman space-times discussed in Section 1. 7, 
2. some results on analytic "boost-rotation" symmetric metrics due to Biecik and 
Schmidt [11), and 
3. some "small data" results, which will be discussed in detail below 
(recall that the Einstein-Rosen metrics discussed in Theorem 1.5.3, although "asymptot­
ically flat" in a 2+1 dimensional sense, are not asymptotically flat in a 3+1 dimensional 
sense, because of translation in variance along the z-axis ). The idea of "small data" re­
sults is to fix some space-time (M, lo), maximal globally hyperbolic developement of 
some data (E, g0 , Ko), and try to prove that for (g, K) sufficiently close to (go, Ko) in 
some norm the global properties of maximal developments (M, 1) of (E,g, K) will mimic 
those of (M, lo).The first class of results of this type has been proved some five years 
ago by Friedrich [52), with or without a cosmological constant, and also for the Einstein­
Yang-Mills system [53); here we shall consider the vacuum case with zero cosmological 
constant only. Friedrich's approach takes advantage of the fact that conformal trans­
formations can map infinite domains into finite ones, reducing in this way the global in 
time stability problem to a much simpler short time stability problem for conformally 
rescaled fields. Suppose thus that a {spatially non-compact) space-time ( M, 1) can be 
34 
conformally mapped into a spatially compact space-time (M/Y) (this can be done e.g. 
for the Minkowski space-time, with (M, 1) - the "Einstein cylinder"' M :::::! IR X S3, 
cf. e.g. [66] or [52]). After such an infinite compression the conformal factor which re­
lates the physical metric I to the "unphysical" metric 1, IJ'V = n-21""' will vanish on 
the boundary oM =I of M in M, which introduces singular terms when one naively 
rewrites Einstein equations for 1 in terms of i and n. Friedrich has observed that one 
can write a well posed system of equations for the conformally rescaled fields which is 
regular even at points at which n vanishes, and which is equivalent to vacuum Einstein 
equations on the set n > 0 ( cf. also [22] [23] for a different "conformally regular" system 
of equations), which leads to the following [52] [54]: 
Theorem 1.6.1 (Future stability of the "hiperboloidal initial value problem") 
Let (go, K 0 ) be the data induced on the unit hyper·boloid :E = { ( t, x, y, z) E JR4 : t = 
Jl + x 2 + y2 + z2} :::::! JR3 from the fiat metric of Minkowski space-time. Consider the 
space X of Cauchy data (g, K) such that 
1. (g, I<) are smoothly conformally compactifiable 49 , i.e. there exist a smooth compact 
Riemannian manifold (E,g) with boundary, with Int(E):::::! :E, where Int(-) is the in­
terior of·, and a smooth (up to boundary) non-negative function n on t, vanishing 
only on at, with dfl(p) # 0 for pEat, such that we have 
9ij = n-2 !Jij , 
and the fields 
fii = n-3(gikgjf J( -.!.gem/{ gij) ki 3 fm , 
are smooth (up to boundary) on :E; 
49 In [52] one assumes, roughly speaking, that (0, g, L, K) E Hk(E) EB Hk(E) EB Hk-l(E) EB Hk-l(E), 
(On, d~-yc• fo:f3) E Hk-t(E) EB Hk-2(E) EB Hk-2(E), k ~ 6; it is rather clear that by not too difficult 
technical improvements of the existence theorems used in [52] this threshold can be relaxed to k ~ 5 
and probably even to k ~· 4. 
35 
2. the Weyl tensor ca rhs of the four-dimensional metric, formally calculated from 
(g, I<) using vacuum Einstein equations, vanishes at the conformal boundary 8'£; 
3. there exist fields Dn and Dnn, smooth (up to boundary) on "£., which we identify 
with tetrad components in the directions normal to f: of the gradient, respectively 
the Hessian, off!, such that 
and the tensor field 
vanishes at a'£. 
Set d01 f3"1S = n-1 C"'iJ"'D! fOI{J = n-1 ea{3· There exists!'.> 0 such that for all (g,I<) EX 
satisfying 
(where Hc(t) is the Sobolev space of tensors on f; which are square integrable together 
with all the derivatives up to orde·r £ on E with respect to the Riemannian measure dp,g of 
the metric g, and Do, 9oij, etc., denote the corresponding quantities for Minkowski space-
time), the maximal globally hyperbolic development (M, is future null and timelike 
geodesically complete, hence ( M, 1) is strongly maximal to the future. 
By the very nature of Friedrich's construction ( cf. the discussion of Example 4 in Section 
1.8) the above theorem gives only "50 %" of TTBP - it guarantees global uniqueness 
to the future of E only, nothing is known about the possibility of supplementing the 
Cauchy data on .E by Cauchy data on the part of I which lies to the past of .E to obtain 
global uniqueness to the past. Moreover, the following features of this Theorem deserve 
further investigation: 1) the rather high differentiability conditions needed for stability, 
2) the hypothesis of the vanishing of the Weyl curvature on the conformal boundary f)f; 
36 
- the so called Weyl tensor condition, 3) the hypothesis of the vanishing of eafl at the 
conformal boundary, 4) the independence of the various hypotheses above. Let us recall 
that the Weyl tensor condition has been shown by Penrose [104] to be necessary for Ck, 
k 2: 3, differentiability of the conformally rescaled fields at the conformal boundary of 
a space-time, but some new results of Christodoulou and Klainerman [29] suggest that 
the Weyl tensor condition needs not to hold in generic space-times obtained by evolution 
from asymptotically flat (at spacelike infinity) initial data (thus generic I's obtained in 
this way will probably not be C3 ). As discussed in detail in Appendix A, the Cauchy 
data sets satisfying the Weyl tensor condition also turn out to be non generic in the 
space of solutions of the constraint equations which can be constructed by the conformal 
method. These drawbacks of Friedrich's theorem are more than compensated by the 
(relative) simplicity of the method. It has recently been shown in [3] that the vanishing 
of the space components e;j of ecxf3 at at, and smoothness of g;j imply the vanishing of 
the Weyl tensor at at, under the supplementary hypotheses that the extrinsic curvature 
oft is pure trace on at (L;i I at = 0), and the Cauchy surface :E has constant extrinsic 
curvature (gii I<;j =const ). 
Friedrich's construction uses Cauchy data which are "asymptotically flat at null infinity". 
A different stability result, with Cauchy data "asymptotically flat at spatial infinity" has 
been proved recently [29] [30] by Christodoulou and Klainerman: 
Theorem 1.6.2 (Nonlinear stability of Minkowski space-time) Let p E :E ~ JR3 , 
a > 0, consider the quantity 
1 2 
Q(a,p) = a-1 1 {l:(d~ + az)f+liV'eRiclz + 'L:(d~ + azn\i'eKiz}dJLg ' 
~ l=O l=O 
(1.6.1) 
where dp is the geodesic distance function from p, Ric is the Ricci tensor of the metric 
g, djt9 is the Riemannian measure of the metric g and \7 is the Riemannian connection 
of g. Let 
Q* = inf Q(a,p) . 
a>O,pE~ 
37 
There is an E > 0 such that if Q* < E, then the maximal globally hyperbolic development 
of (E, g, I<) is geodesically complete, thus strongly maximal. 
Christodoulou and Klainerman supplement this important and extremely difficult the­
orem by detailed information on the asymptotic behaviour of the gravitational field in 
various regimes, under the hypothesis, however, of stronger than required above fall-off 
of the initial data. Due to lack of space, and because these results are only loosely related 
to the problem of uniqueness in the large, we shall not discuss them here, the reader is 
referred to [29] for more details. It is worthwile noting that the condition of finiteness of 
Q(a,p) defined in (L6.1) will be satisfied if e.g. there exists a coordinate system covering 
the complement of a compact set such that 
g .. - 5 · - O(r- 1/ 2-') 8· g·· - O(r- 312-') {). • • • 8· g·· = O(r- 712-') ?.J 'tJ - ' !1 'lJ - ' • • • ' Zl ~3 't] ' 
.. ~ ' 
In terms of rates of decay of the metric to the flat one, these are the well known conditions 
for a finite and well defined ADM mass [5] [31] of the initial Cauchy data set. Under 
the condition that Q(a,p) is finite, Christodoulou and Klainerman have also been able 
to establish the important fact, that the maximal globally hyperbolic development of 
(~, g, I<) contains "a neighbourhood of i 0 ", cf. [29] for more details. 
1.7 Beyond the spacelike Cauchy problem: Robinson­
Trautman space-times. 
In the standard dynamical formulation of general relativity one considers space-times 
which develop from Cauchy data prescribed on a spacelike hypersurface. This situation 
seems natural for addressing questions such as existence and uniqueness of solutions, but 
there may be other settings in which such questions make sense, since space-times can be 
constructed by various other methods, e.g. some solution generating techniques. A natu­
ral extension of the spacelike Cauchy problem is the characteristic initial value problem, 
38 
in which the initial data are prescribed on a null rather than spacelike hypersurface. In 
this context the only general result available (in the vacuum) is a local existence theorem 
for data prescribed on two null transversally intersecting hypersurfaces (96] [107]. The 
analytic initial value problem with Cauchy data given on a Cauchy horizon has been 
shown to be well posed in the vacuum by V. Moncrief [88] [89]. In the non-vacuum case, 
the characteristic initial value problem for a spherically symmetric self-gravitating scalar 
field has been studied by D. Christodoulou [26], the initial hypersurface being the light 
cone of a point. In this section we shall discuss an interesting class of metrics which 
evolve from singular data prescribed on a null hypersurface - the Robinson- Trautman 
(RT) space-times. There are several interesting features exhibited by the RT metrics: the 
evolution of the metric is unique in spite of a "naked singularity"; suprisingly, Einstein 
equations reduce to a single parabolic fourth order equation in this class of metrics. From 
a physical point· of view the RT metrics can be thought of as representing an isolated 
gravitationally radiating system- in fact these metrics were the first ones to be found, 
describing such a situation [109]. By definition the Robinson- Trautman space-times can 
be foliated by a null hypersurface orthogonal shear free geodesic congruence. It has been 
shown by I. Robinson and A. Trautman that in such a space-time there always exists a 
coordinate system in which the metric takes the form 
(1.7.1) 
0 0 
9ab = 9ab(xa), R r 2m <P - - + -D. R- -- 2 12m g r ' 
- 2.\0 R = R(gab) = R(e 9ab), 
m is a constant which is related to the total Bondi mass of the metric, R is the Ricci 
scalar of the metric 9ab = e2)\llab, and eM, Yab) is a smooth Riemannian manifold which 
we shall assume to be a two dimensional sphere (other topologies are considered in 
[34]). The Cauchy data for an RT metric consist of .A0 (xa) = .A(u = u0 , xa), which 
is equivalent to prescribing the metric 9ttv of the form (1.7.1) on the null hypersurface 
{ u = uo, xa E 2 M, r E (0, oo )}, which extends up to a curvature singularity at r = 0 
(the scalar R01r;-ysRO!f3-yb diverges at r = 0 as r-6 ). 
The global structure of RT space-times turns out to be different, depending upon the 
39 
z+(r = oo} 
r=o 
Figure 1. 7.1: m < 0 
sign of m: let us discuss the negative m case first. Recall that for m < 0 it is natural 
to consider a backwards (in u) initial value problem rather than a forwards initial value 
problem; alternatively one could think of u as being a retarded null coordinate ( u ,...., 
"r + t") rather than an advanced one (u "'"r- t"). The results of R Schmidt [112] (cf. 
also [48]) and of reference [33] imply: 
Theorem 1.7.1 (The global structure of negative-mass RT space-times) For any 
..\0 E C00 (2 M) there exists a unique RT space-time with a complete i0 (in the sense of 
[4}), a complete z- and "a piece oJI+", as shown in Figure 1.7.1, moreover 
1. 4 M is smoothly e.rtendible through 1f+, 
2. If ..\0 is not analytic there exist no vacuum RT extension through 1f+. 
There are several interesting features of this result. Because of the singularity r = 0 in the 
initial data one could wonder whether any solutions of the Einstein equations would exist 
at all: it turns out that solutions exist either in the backwards or in the forward direction 
in u, depending upon the sign of m, moreover they are unique in the Robinson- Trautman 
dass 50 • Let us recall that the "weak cosmic censorship" conjecture, discussed in Section 
50It may be possible that there exist vacuum solutions with the same data at u = U 0 which are not in 
the Robinson- Trautman class. 
40 
1.4, can be formulated as the statement that the past of r+ is determined uniquely by the 
initial data. In the negative m case we are solving a backwards 51 initial value problem, 
i.e. a ''final" value problem, so in this context the cosmic censorship hypothesis should 
be reformulated as the requirement that the future of I- be determined uniquely by the 
"final" data. Theorem 1.7.1 establishes such a fact (in the RT class of vacuum metrics) 
for RT space-times with negative mass 52 • The information about the structure at i 0 is 
also rather interesting, though it must be said that its interest is somewhat diminished 
by the negativity of the ADM mass there. (It may be of some relevance to note that the 
limit as u ....,.. -oo of the Bondi mass coincides with the ADM n1ass, as expected). 
The generic non-extendability of the metric through H+ in the vacuum RT class is rather 
suprising, and seems to be related to a similar non-extendability result for compact non­
analytic Cauchy horizons in the polarized Gowdy class, cf. [37]. Since it may well be 
possible that there exist vacuum extensions which are not in the RT class, this result 
does not convicingly demonstrate a failure of Einstein equations to propagate generic 
data forwards in u in such a situation; however, it certainly shows that the forward 
evolution of the metric via Einstein equations breaks down in the class of RT metrics. 
One can think of this as a "50%" failure of TTBP in the space of negative mass RT 
metrics: generic (in the sense: non-analytic initial data) RT metrics are extendible but 
not RT vacuum extendible beyond 1-(+, and thus in the terminology of Section 1.1 the 
space-time of Figure 1. 7.1 is maximal but not strongly maximal in the RT class. 
In the positive mass case the results of [112] [124] [33] [34] [39] show the following: 
Theo:rem 1. 7.2 (The global st:ructure of positive-mass RT space-times) For any 
.\0 E C00 (S2 ) ther-e exists a Robinson-Tmut!nan space-time (4 l'J,g) with a "half-complete" 
51 0ne can of course put everything upside down, changing u. to -u, which then becomes an "advanced 
null coordinate" ra.ther than a retarded one, and what was a backwards initial value problem becomes 
a standard one. 
52 In this formulation of weak cosmic censorship (w.c.c.) no mention is made of horizons. One should 
recall that in the usual form of w.c.c. one "hides" singularities under a horizon to "hide" the regions of 
potential non-uniqueness of solutions. In the RT case uniqueness holds regardless of "nakedness" of the 
singularity r = 0. 
41 
r=o 
Figure 1.7.2: m > 0. 
I+, the global structure of which is shown in Figure 1. 7.2, moreover 
1. (4 M,g) is smoothly extendible to the past through 1{-, if however >.0 is not analytic 
no vac·uum Robinson- Trautman extensions through 1{- exist. 
2. There exist an infinite number of non-isometric vacuum Robinson- Trautman C5 
extensions 53 of (4 M, g) through Ji+, which are obtained by 
other positive mass Robinson- T~~utman spacetime, as shown in Figure 1. 7.3. 
3. There exist an infinite number of C117 vacuum RT extensions of (4 A1,g) through 
Ji+ - one such extension can be obtained by a copy of (4 M, to itself, as 
shown in Figure 1. 7.3. 
4. For any 6 :::; k :5 oo there exists an open set ('h of Robinson- Trautman space-times 
(in a ck topology on the set RT Cauchy data on a hypersurface Uo = which 
no C123 extensions beyond Ji+ vacuum or otherwise. F'or any 'U0 there exists 
an open ball l:h around the Cauchy data for the Schwarzschild metric s'ach that 
ok n l3k is dense in l3k. 
The picture that emerges from Theorem 1. 7. 2 is the generic ip.itial data lead to 
a space-time which has no RT vacuum extension to the past of the initial surface, even 
~~----------------------
53By this we mean that the metric can be C5 extended beyond 1(+; the extension can actually be 
chosen to be of C5·"' differentiability class, for any 01 < 1. 
42 
r=o 
U = U 0 
u = 00 
r = oo U = U 0 
r=o 
Figure 1.7.3: Vacuum RT extensions beyond Jt+ 
though the metric can be smoothly extended (in the non-vacuum class); and generic 
"small 54 initial data" lead to a space-time for which no smooth vacuum RT extensions 
exist beyond Jt+. This shows that considering smooth extensions across Jt+ leads to 
non-existence, and giving up the requirement of smoothness of extensions beyond Jt+ 
leads to non-uniqueness. It follows that TTBP completely fails in the class of positive 
mass Robinson- Trautman metrics. It should be recognized that this might be thought of 
as demonstrating only some pathological aspects of the Robinson- Trautman conditions, 
rather than some real features of the theory. 
1.8 Necessary conditions for uniqueness in the large. 
In this section we shall discuss, by means of examples, some natural restrictions which 
one may wish to impose on the spaces X(L:) and M(L:) introduced in TTBP. 
Example 1: Let (L:, g, K) be Cauchy data for a cylindrically symmetric polarized metric: 
(1.8.1) 
U=U(t,r), A=A(t,r), 
L: = {t = 0} ~ JR:'3. 
54 It is rather clear from the results of [39] that generic RT space-times will not be smoothly extendible 
across 1f+, without any restrictions on the "size" of the initial data; but no rigorous proof is available. 
43 
For metrics of the form (1.8.1) vacuum Einstein equations essentially reduce to a single 
linear wave equation (in the flat Minkowski metric) for U, 
[ {)2 {)2 {)2 ] 
DU = at2 - ax2 - ay2 U = 0' (1.8.2) 
x=rcos¢, y =sin¢, 
and the Cauchy data reduce to Cauchy data for U: r.p = r.p(r) = U(O,r), 1/; = 1/;(r) = 
~~ (0, r ). (Given any solution U of the wave equation (1.8.2), the function A appearing 
_in the metric can be found by elementary integrations, cf. e.g. Section 3.5.). 
Let p = p(t, r) E 1Y(JR3 ) be a distribution on JR?, such that supp p n :E = ¢, where 
f.;= {(t, x, y) E JR3 : t = 0}, define Up as the unique solution of the problem 
o Up= p, (1.8.3) 
aUp (aU ) -(t=0)=1/;= -(t=O) at at 
(Up will exist if e.g. p E Hm(IR3 ), ( r.p, 1/;) E Hk(:E) EEl Hk-l (:E), for any m, k E lR (in 
particular iff E C0 (JR), then the distribution p given by 
m < -3/2 (1.8.4) 
is an allowed distribution.) Let Mp be the interior of JR4 \ {(t,x,y,z): p(t,x,y) f. 0}, 
let IP be the metric (1.8.1) with U =Up, and an appropriate A- the family (Mp,lp) 
is thus a family of vacuum space-times parametrized by the set of functions p E 'D'(JR3 ) 
subJect to the restrictions above, each member (Mp, lp) being a vacuum development 
of ('E, g, K), and it is easy to see that for different p's one will in general obtain non­
isometric space-times. 
Obviously the non-uniqueness described here arises from the fact that we have put some 
"matter" p in our space-time, and pretended "it is not there" by removing from our 
manifold the regions where matter was present. This example shows that in order to 
achieve any kind of uniqueness it is natural to consider these developments ( M, 1) only, 
which contain as a subset the maximal globally hyperbolic development (M0 , Ia) of the 
44 
data, in other words, that there exists an isometric embedding of ( M0 , 'Yo) into ( M, 'Y). 
Such a restriction, when imposed in the example above, would exclude all the 1'11p 's except 
for the space-time obtained by solving (1.8.3) with p = 0. 
The space-times (Mp, /'p) obtained from p of the form (1.8.4) provide a family of examples 
which suggest that non-uniqueness of solutions might arise in space-times with naked 
singularities. As is shown in Appendix E, given a smooth f(t) such that 0 tf_ supp f, 
and smooth tp and '1/J, there exists a unique solution Up of (1.8.3) with p given by (1.8.4) 
which is smooth on lR3 \supp p. If we set supp f to be, say, the interval [1, 2], and we 
vary J, we will obtain an infinite dimensional family of non-isometric space-times with 
a "naked singularity sitting on the set" { t E [1, 2], x = y = 0}. The arbitrariness off 
represents an arbitrariness introduced by the singularity, thus f can be thought of as a 
"boundary condition at the singularity". All these space-times are of course excluded by 
the criterion that we consider only these developments which are "at least as large as 
the maximal globally hyperbolic development", they seem however to indicate that the 
occurrence of real singularities might lead to behaviour which is difficult to control. 
Example 2: Let (:E, g, K) be the initial data for Minkowski space-time on an open 
unit ball: :E = B(l) C ~' 9ij = 8;j, K;j = 0. As has been shown by Bartnik [8] 
(:E, g, I<) may be extended in an infinite number of ways to a Cauchy data set 55 (E, g, K), 
E = IR3 . The maximal globally hyperbolic development ( M, 'Y) of (:E, g, K) is the set 
{ -1 < t < 1, 0 :::; r < 1 - ltl} C IR4 with the Minkowski metric, and any globally 
hyperbolic development (Af,;;y) of (E,g,k) will provide an extension of (M,7). This 
example shows that in TTBP it is natural to restrict our attention to inextendible Cauchy 
data sets (:E, g, K) - such a condition would exclude the behaviour described there. 
There are at least two ways for a Cauchy data set (:E, g, K) to be inextendible: one is to 
assume that (:E, g) is complete, another possibility is the occurrence of a singularity at 
"what would have been fJ:E", let us consider the latter first: 
55 (E, g, K) can even be chosen to be asymptotically flat. 
45 
r=o 
Figure 1.8.1: 2 M~ 52 , m > 0. 
Example 3: Fix u0 < u1 ::S: oo, consider some smoth space-like hypersurface ~ C 
[u0 , ut) x lR x S2, as shown in Figure 1.8.1, let (g, I<) be the data induced on L; for 
a Robinson-Trautman space-time obtained by prescribing some smooth function ~ E 
C00 (S2 ) at u = Uo (cf. Section 1.7). The hypersurface L; is inextendible through its 
"left corner", Figure 1.8.1 because of the singularity at r = 0 of Robinson- Trautman 
metrics. Theorem 1.7.2 shows that there exist an infinite number of C117 extensions to 
the future of L; of the maximal globally hyperbolic development of (I:, g, K), which is, 
in Robinson-Trautman coordinates (u,r,B,<p), the set (u0 ,u1 ) x lR x S2 (note that if 
u1 < oo then there exists a neighbourhood of the hypersurface { u = u1 } in which the 
metric is uniquely defined in the vacuum Robinson- Trautman class by (I:, g, I<), this 
fails, however, at the horizon fi+ = { "u = oo"} ). This example suggests that in TTBP 
it may not be possible to allow for Cauchy data (I:, g, I<) which are inextendible through 
"8E" because of "singularities sitting on 8E". It should be, however, pointed out that 
although this behaviour is generic in the class of Robinson- Trautman space-times, the 
Robinson- Trautman space-times themselves are not generic, and it cannot be excluded 
that this kind of non-uniqueness might disappear in generic situations. 
Example 4: Let p::;, g, K) be "hyperboloidal initial data", as described in Appendix A, 
in particular (I:, g) is a complete Riemannian manifold; suppose moreover that ( E, g, I<) 
is "smoothly conformally compactifiable" and that the hypotheses of Theorem 1.6.1 hold 
46 
I+ + I+ + 
Figure 1.8.2: A "hyperboloidal" initial data surface. 
( cf. e.g. [3], or Section 1.6 and Appendix A for more details). We can choose the time 
orientation in such a way that the maximal vacuum globally hyperbolic development 
(M,1) of (E,g,I<) contains at least "a piece" It of I+, where It is the part of I+ to 
the future of E, cf. Figure 1.8.2 ( cf. Theorem 1.6.1 and [52]). Using e.g. the techniques of 
Ref. (107] one can show56 that supplementing (E, g, I<) by appropriate smooth data on I:: 
- the part of I+ in the past of E - one can find a vacuum metric on a neighbourhood 0 
of E ui::. There is arbitrariness in the choice of the "missing data on I::", and different 
data 57 will lead to non-isometric extension of (M,1) to the past of E. This example 
shows that even the requirement of completeness of (E,g) is not sufficient in TTBP. 
Let us dose this section by emphasizing that it seems natural to require that 
e The space M(E) of Lorentzian manifolds introduced in TTBP should contain only 
those developments (M, 1) of (E, g, I<) which contain the unique maximal globally 
hyperbolic Hausdorff development of (E, g, K); 
• if 2; is compact, then all the metrics in X(2;) should be complete; 
@ for non-compact E, all metrics in X(E) should be complete and e.g. asymptotically 
56 H. Friedrich, private communication. 
57 By choosing (E, g, K) to be the data induced on the standard hyperboloid in Minkowski space-time 
one can by this method construct a curious space-time which is the Minko"ivski space-time to the future 
of a hyperboloid, and not-Minkowski to its past. 
47 
flat in the sense of Theorem 1.6.2. 
48 
Chapter 2 
"Highly symmetric" space-times 
In this chapter we shall describe the spaces of maximal globally hyperbolic (Hausdorff) 
spaces-times for which the groups S0(3) x U(l), S0(3) (two-dimensional principal orbits) 
and U(l) X U(l) X U(l) act by isometries on some compact, connected and orientable 
Cauchy surface. We start by proving the well known result, that symmetries of Cauchy 
data lead to symmetries of the space-time: 
2.1 From symmetric Cauchy data to symmetric space­
times. 
In this Section we shall show that the existence of symmetries of Cauchy data implies the 
existence of symmetries of the space-time. Let us start with a "Killing vector approach" 
to this problem. The result that follows is essentially due to Moncrief [86] [Sections 
IV, V], we present the proof here for completeness (the proof below also seems to be 
somewhat simpler than the one in [86]; a similar proof can be found in [47]): 
Theorem 2.1.1 Let (M, 1) be a vacuum globally hyperbolic space-time, with a time func­
tion t, let Er = {p E M : t(p) = T}. Let X" be a vector field on M defined in a 
neighbourhood of Eo such that for p E Eo we have 
(2.1.1) 
49 
(2.1.2) 
where '\7 is the covariant derivative of the metric 'Y· There exists a vector field X on M 
satisfying 
pE ~o Xa(P) =X a(P), '\7 a X13(p) = '\7 a X f3(P) · 
Proof. Let X"' be the unique solution of 
DX"' =0 
{2.1.3) 
{2.1.4) 
(2.1.5) 
satisfying (2.1.4). (Because {M,/) is globally hyperbolic, a solution of {2.1.4)-{2.1.5) will 
exist on M, if e.g., in local coordinates, we have 8a1 ••• 8a, ·111, E L~c{~t), 0 :::; i :::; k + 2, 
k E JN U {0}, where L~c(~t) denotes the space of functions defined almost everywhere 
on ~t which are measurable and essentially bounded on every compact subset of ~t. and 
if 8;1 ••• 8;lX alEc E L~oc.(~o), 0:::; f.:::; k + 1, 8;1 ••• 8;j(8tX a)IEo E L~oc{~o), 0:::; j:::; k; 
under these conditions we will have (8a1 ••• 8a, Xa) IE, E Lfoc(~t) for all t, 0:::; i:::; k+ 1). 
Let us note that (as is well known) it follows from {2.1.3) that 
(2.1.6) 
so that {2.1.5) is a necessary condition for {2.1.3) to hold in a vacuum space-time. We 
shall show that {2.1.1), (2.1.2), (2.1.4) and (2.1.5) and the fact that (M,1) in vacuum 
imply (2.1.3). Set 
From {2.1.5) and from 
one obtains 
(2.1.7) 
Under the ,conditions on the metric and on X a outlined above with k ~ 1 (which will 
hold if e.g. fJlV and X11 are SmOOth) it follOWS that every SOlution Of {2.1.7) With zerO 
50 
initial data vanishes identically; and the vanishing of the initial data for A.,p follows from 
(2.1.1 )-(2.1.2). 0 
Corollary 2.1.1 Under the hypotheses of Theorem 2.1.1, suppose that on ~0 there exists 
a smooth vector field Y such that 
Cv g = Cv K = 0, 
where Cy denotes a Lie derivative. There exists a smooth vector field X on M such that 
Cx 1 = 0, 
p E ~o X(p) = iEo. Y, 
where iEo is the embedding of ~0 in M. 
Proof. Let us rewrite eqs. (2.1.1)-(2.1.2) in 3+1 notation; let n"' be the unit normal to 
the slicing~.,. (n"' n., = -1), define 
f3u = n"' 'V.,n", g11v = ! 11v + n11 nv, I<11v = g11"' 9v.B'V., np, 
X= -X"' n01 , ya = 901 ,8 X.B ( ==> X 01 = xn01 + Y01 ), 
Dnx = n~' 'V 11 x , Dn ya = g01 .B n11 'V 11 y.B . 
Using this notation, (2.1.1) can be rewritten in the form 
Ly 9a,B = -2x Ka,B, 
Dnx = -f3u Y" , 
DnY 01 = K 01 p y.B + D01 x- xj301 , 
(2.1.8) 
(2.1.9) 
(2.1.10) 
where D is the covariant derivative operator of the Riemannian metric 9a.B induced by 'Ya.B 
on~.,.. When (2.1.8)-(2.1.10) hold, one finds that 1) the equations obtained by projecting 
all indices in (2.1.2) on~,. are identically satisfied, 2) the equations obtained from (2.1.2) 
by projecting one of the indices along n and the remaining on ~.,. are equivalent to 
(2.1.11} 
51 
where K = ga/3 Kap, and 3 Ra/3 is the Ricci curvature of the metric 9af3, 3) and finally 
the equations obtained from (2.1.2) by projecting more than one index along n~' involve 
second time derivatives of x, ya in a way consistent with eq. (2.1.5) if (2.1.8)-(2.1.11) 
hold. If (g, K) are invariant under the flow of a vector field Y, then we can set X~'(O, ·) = 
Y~'(·), (x(O,·) = -X~'np.(O,·) = 0) and use (2.1.9)-(2.1.10) to determinen~'\7p.Xa(O,·), 
obtaining thus Cauchy data for equation (2.1.5), which satisfy those of the equations 
(2.1.1)-(2.1.2) which do not contain second time derivatives of xa. Solving (2.1.5) we 
will obtain a Killing vector field on any globally hyperbolic development of (3~,g,K).D 
When considering symmetric data sets, it is natural to ask the following: 
1. are discrete symmetries of ( 3 ~,g, K) preserved under evolution? 
2. suppose that we have a group G acting on 3 ~, which leaves both g and K invariant; 
can we define an action of G on some development of (3 'f., g, K)? 
The argument that follows answers both of these questions, at least when 3 ~ is compact: 
Theorem 2.1.2 Let (3~,g, K) be a smooth Cauchy data set, with 3 ~ - compact, sup­
pose that a group G acts smoothly on 3 'f. 
and we have 
( ¢/ gih ¢/ K;i) = (g;h Kii) . 
For any development (M, 1) of (3~, g, K) there exists a (globally hyperbolic} neighbour­
hood 0 C M of 3 ~, and an action IJ! of the group G on 0, 
G X 0 3 (g, p) ~ IJ! g (p) E 0 , 
such that 
52 
Moreover, there exists_ a diffeomorphism '1/J : 0 f-+ ( -T, T) x3 I: such that we have 
w o = w o q,o o w-1 , 
where q,o is the following action ofG on (-T,T) x3 I:: 
(2.1.12) 
and the hypersurfaces { t} x3 I:, t E ( -T, T), are space-like. 
Remark. Theorem 2.1.2 will still hold if (g;j K;j)(O, ·) E Hk(I:o)tBHk-t(I:o), k 2 4. One 
would expect the result to be true under the condition k > 5/2, or, say k 2 3, the proof 
presented here, however, fails if k = 3. This is due to the fact that the differentiability 
of the map IT! constructed below is not better than this of 1, which in turn leads to 
a differentiability class of i = (w-1 )*I worse by one as compared to I· If k = 3 the 
differentiability of i is not high enough to guarantee uniqueness of solutions, and the 
argument breaks down. 
Proof. Let vei:) be the domain of dependence of 3 I: in (M,1); replacing M by vei:) 
if necessary we may assume that M = vei:), and thus M is glob~lly hyperbolic. Let t 
be the unique solution of the problem 
(2.1.13) 
(2.1.14) 
where o., is the scalar wave operator of the metric 1, o., = '\7"' '\7 a· Let 0 be any 
neighbourhood of 3 I: on which IJLv '\7~"t'\7vt < 0, by compactness of 3 I: there exists a> 0 
such that M(! = {p E M : t(p) < a} C 0. Let I:t denote the level sets of t, we can 
use the integral curves of '\7t to identify Mu with (-a, a) x I:0 • Let g be any smooth 
Riemannian G-invariant metric on 3 I:, on Mu we can define the Lorentzian metric 
0 0 2 0 
1 = 1 JLV dx~" dxv = -dt + g . 
Note that the action (2.1.12) preserves+ 
"' * • • 'i!g I =I · (2.1.15) 
53 
Consider the following initial value problem for a map W : ( ( -r, r) x 3 :E, 1) --t ( (-a, a) x 
3:E,1), 
o(I,,.Y)w = o, 
1!1(t = 0, ·) = id3E(·), aw"' n'" ?)""(t = 0, ·) = sg, 
ux~" 
where D('Y, -Y) is the Lorentzian harmonic map operator; in local coordinates 
(2.1.16) 
(2.1.17) 
(2.1.18) 
where f3'"~(h) denotes the Christoffel symbols of a metric h. There exists r > 0 such 
that there exists a unique smooth 1 solution of the problem (2.1.16)-(2.1.17) defined on 
( -7, r) x 3 :E. Note that from (2.1.13) and (2.1.14) we have 
and uniqueness of solutions of (2.1.16) implies l/J0 = t. This shows that, decreasing 7 if 
necessary, there exist diffeomorphisms 1/Jt :3 :E +-+ 3 "E such that 
( -r, x 3 E 3 (t,p) +-+ <l!(t,p) = (t, 
and from (2.1.17) we have 
1/Jo = 
On 11Jr we can define an action of group G as follows: 
g E G, W 9 =W- 1 o~goW. 
The claim that the maps W 9 are isometries of 1 is equivalent to the statement that the 
maps <ll9 are isometries of the Inetric i' = (w- 1 )*I· The covariance of the equation 
(2.1.18) under changes of coordinates in the source space implies that the identity map 
1It is not too difficult to show, using e.g. the methods of[20], that if Oa1 ••• Oa; !,..v(t, ·) E Hk0~j (3E1), 
0:;:; j $ k, k 2 3, then there will exist a solution of (2.1.16)-(2.1.17) satisfying 0011 •• • Oa; \li~'(t, ·) E 
Hlo~j (3E,). 
54 
also satisfies (2.1.18) which in local coordinates reads 
(2.1.20) 
As is well known ( cf. e.g. [20]) Einstein equations with conditions (2.1.18) are a well 
posed hyperbolic system for the metric ;y, the solutions being determined uniquely by 
the initial data (g, J<), with (g, J<) - obtained by appropriately transforming (g, I<). 
In our case, (2.1.19) implies (g,I<) = (g,J<). Consider now the metric i'9 = cl>/i'· 
19 satisfies vacuum Einstein equations, and by coordinate-invariance of (2.1.20) under a 
simultaneous change of coordinates for both the metric 1 and i' it follows that A'Y defined 
by (2.1.20) satisfies A'Y = 0 = 1;/3 (r:13 (1)- r:13 (i'9 )) (and we have used q;9 * 1 = 1). 
The initial data for i'9 are given by 
and uniqueness implies 
0 
It must be stressed that while the Killing vectors argument, Theorem 2.1.1, proves the 
existence of Killing vector fields defined on the whole of (M,/), provided (M,1) is 
globally hyperbolic, Theorem 2.1.2 shows only existence of a neighbourhood of 3 E on 
which the group G acts. It is easily seen that the hypothesis of compactness of E is 
necessary: consider the space-time M = {( t, x) E JR? : It I < f( x)} with the metric 
/11-vdxll-dxv = -dt2 + dx2 , where 0 < f is a differentiable function such that ldf fdxl < 1, 
and limlxl->oo /( x) = 0. ( M, 1) is globally hyperbolic, the translations in x are isometries 
of the Cauchy data at t = 0, but the action does not extend to M. Similarly it can 
be seen that for spatially compact space-times the action of the symmetry group given 
by Theorem 2.1.2 needs not to extend beyond a neighbourhood o{the Cauchy' surface: 
consider the space-time M = {(t,x) E lR x S1 : ltl < 1 + (sinx)/2}, with the metric 
55 
-dt 2 + dx 2 , and we have identified S 1 with [0, 211" hmod 2,.. The translations in x do not 
extend beyond the strip {ltl < 1/2}. 
It is a remarkable fact, that isometries of Cauchy data always extend to the maximal 
globally hyperbolic developments, regardless of whether the Cauchy surface is compact 
or not. Before proving this, let us restate the Choquet-Bruhat- Geroch theorem 1.1.2 
in a form more suitable for our further applications: 
Theorem 2.1.3 Let (E,g, K) be a Cauchy data set, where E is a Hausdorff manifold 
and g, ]{ E C00 (E). There exists a coo I vacuum, Hausdorff, globally hyperbolic devel­
opment (M, I• i) of (E, g, K) such that for every smooth, Hausdorff, globally hyperbolic 
development (M, :y, i) of (E, g, K) there exists an isometric embedding \]! : M -+ M 
satisfying 
\]!oi=i. 
Any developement ( M, 1) satisfying the above will be called a maximal globally hyperbolic 
developement. It is clear from the above that maximal developements are unique, up to 
isometry, and inextendible in the class of smooth, Hausdorff, globally hyperbolic space­
times. We shall also need the following: 
Lemma 2.1.1 Let (M,1) be a smooth, Hausdorff, connected Lorentzian manifold, let 
\]! : M -+ M be a smooth map such that 
\]!*1 =I ' 'l!fs = id (S # 0) , 
where S is either an open set, or a non-everywhere-null submanifold of codimension 1; 
in this last case we moreover assume that \]! is oritmtation-preserving. Then 
\]! = id . 
Remark:. Note that in the case when Sis a submanifold one does not need to assume 
any kind of completeness of S. 
56 
Proof: Suppose first that Sis an open set, letS be the largest open set such that Wls = 
id. Suppose that s is not dosed, thus there exists p E aS, let 0 be any neighbourhood 
of p with a local coordinate system such that x~"(p) = 0, smoothness of il' implies, in 
local coordinates, 
()if! it 
-0 (0) = 8~ , 8<7, · · · 8cr, W~-'(0) = 0 . 
XI-' . 
(2.1.21) 
From = 1 one has 
(2.1.22) 
(2.1.23) 
where r denotes the Christoffel symbols of the metric I· Setting A~ :=: ~, from the 
equation (2.1.23) one obtains the following of ODE's along rays emanating from 
the origin: 
r = (l:::(xc?)l/2 ' 
and the initial conditions 1.21) together with 
which leads to a 
of solutions of systems of 
ODE's imply W~-' = x~-' in and shows that = 0, thus 
S=M. 
Suppose now that 8 is a hypersurface, let p E S be such that S is not null in a. neighbour­
hood of p, let 0 be a neighbourhood of p with a coordinate system 
such that S n 0 = and lxi(O, y) = 0; note that 
follows that along the curves y = canst we have 
d(!JP 
d;;~ 
y) = 0, --fO y1 = {)yj \ 5. I 
57 
y) i- 0. From 
= 0' 
~ , . . ' 
it 
which together with (2.1.22) gives 
and \II iu = id for some neighbourhood U of p follows. U = M foliows by part 1 of this 
Lemma. 0 
Corollary 2.1.2 Let ('2;, g, K) be smooth Cauchy data on a Hausdorff manifold r;, let 
¢ : r; --> !; be a smooth diffeomorphism, set g = ¢* g, k = ¢* K. Let (M, 1, i), respectively 
(M,)',i) be the maximal globally hyperbolic (vacuum, Hausdorff, smooth) development of 
(E,g,K), respectively of('l;,g,K). There exists a diffeomorphism <I>: M--> M such that 
<I>*!=)', and 
<I>oi=io¢. 
' Proof: By definition we have (¢- 1 )*9 = g, (¢- 1 )*K = K, thus (M,)',i6¢- 1 ) 1s a 
development of ('l;,g, K): By maximality of (M, /, i) it follows from Theorem 2.1.3 that 
there exists an isometric embedding <I> : M ~ M such that <I> o i o ¢-1 = i. A similar 
argument using maximality of (M, )', i) shows that there exists an isometric embedding 
\II : M--> M such that \II o i o ¢ = i. One thus has \II o <I> o i = i, (\II o <I>)*)'=)', so that 
W o <I> is an isometry which is the identity on i(l;)~ therefore \II o <I>= id by Lemma 2.1.1. 
This shows that <I> is invertible, and the result follows. 0 
The main result of this Section is the following: 
Theorem 2.1.4 Let ('l;,g,l<) be smooth Cauchy data on a Hausdorff manifold r;, let 
(M, /, i) be the maximal globally hyperbolic (vacuum, Hausdorff, smooth) development of 
('l;,g,K), suppose that a group G acts on ('l;,g,K) by smooth isometries: 
(¢;g = g, <P; K = K). There exists- an action of G on- M, 
G x M 3 (g~~)--> ci>9 (p) EM , 
58 
such that 
'VgEG 
Proof: Let (M9 , -y9 , i9 ) be a maximal globally hyperbolic development of (E, </>;g, </>;I<). 
By Corollary 2.1.2 there exists a diffeomorphism W 9 : M9 -+ M such that W 9 o i9 = i o ¢>9 , 
w;-y = 'Yu· Since </>;g = g, <t>;I< = I<, Theorem 2.1.3 moreover implies the existence 
of a diffeomorphism 29 : M9 -+ M such that 29 o i9 = i, s;'Y = -y9 • Consider the 
diffeomorphism ()9 = \119 o 2;1 : M-+ M. We have 
thus the ()g's are isometries, moreover 
~ ' •T• ~-1 ' ,T, · ' ), 'j!gOZ='Ilg0:;, 9 OZ='Ilg0Zg=ZO<f'g• 
Lemma 2.1.1 easily implies <Pgh o(>h"1 o<P;1 = id, thus <P9h = <P9o<Ph. Finally continuity of 
<P9 in g follows from the continuous dependence upon Cauchy data (on compact subsets) 
of the solutions of the initial value problem for Einstein equations. D 
2.2 80(3) x U(l) symmetric space-times, 3 ~ = L(p, 1). 
Consider the set of space-times with Cauchy-data on compact, connected, orientable 
manifolds 3 E, invariant under an effective action of the group G = S0(3) x U(1) or 
G = ( SU(2) X U(1)) / D, D = {( -1, -1), (1, 1)}, with three-dimensional principal orbits. 
In this Section we shall outline the proof of the claim, that this set consists of the Taub­
NUT metrics. As discussed by Fischer [45), 3 E is necessarily S3 or a lens space L(p, 1), 
and the action of G is unique up to equivalence. Identifying U(1) with the subgroup of 
SU(2) consisting of matrices of the form diag(ei"', e-i"'), and identifying SU(2) with S3 
in the standard way, it follows that up to homomorphism of G and diffeomorphism of 3 E 
the action of G on 3 E is given by 
(2.2.1) 
59 
91 E S0(3) or SU(2), 92 E U(l). 
When G = [SU(2) x U(l)]/D, and/or when 3 :E = L(p, 1), p-=/:- 1, appropriate equivalence 
relations in (2.2.1) should be taken into account 2 • For any p E 3 :E there exists a neigh­
bourhood Op of p diffeomorphic with a neighbourhood Ue of the identity of SU(2) ~ S3 , 
using this diffeomorphism any G-invariant metric on 3L: can be pulled-back to define a 
G-in variant metric on Ue. Let X;( e) be any basis of Te SU(2), let 
where R9 is the right action of SU(2) on itself. Since the right and left actions commute, 
the vector fields X; are left-invariant. Also, by definition of the adjoint representation 
ad, 
As is well-known, the ad representation of SU(2) acts on Te SU(2) ~ lEi? by rotations, 
and we can choose X3 (e) so that U(l) = diag(ei"',e-i"') acts as rotations around the 
X3 (e)-axis. Let (·,·)be a metric on Ue C SU(2), invariant under the action (2.2.1). The 
SU(2) invariance implies that the functions 
are p-independent. The U(l) invariance implies that g;j is a 2-covariant tensor on JR3 
invariant under rotations around the "z-axis", which by straightforward considerations 
leads to 
-d. ( a a b) 9ij = 1ag e , e , e , 
for some a, b E JR. It follows that any G-invariant metric on S3 is of the form 
(2.2.2) 
where the wi's are left invariant forms on S3 , dual to the vectors X; as defined above. 
The argument presented in Ref. [12], Chapter II, Section 3, shows that the vacuum 
2 Equation (2.2.1) defines an action of 8U(2) x U(l) on 3:E, this action is however not effective. 
eo 
dynamics does not lead to a rotation of the eigen-axes of the U(1) action, thus in a 
vacuum S0(3) x U(1) or [SU(2) x U(1)]/ D symmetric space-time an appropriate choice 
of time r and of the wi's leads to 
(2.2.3) 
for some functions a(r), b(r). In Section 8.2 of Ref. [111] all solutions of Einstein 
equations with a metric of the form (2.2.3) have been found-these are the Taub-NUT 
metrics. 
2.3 80(3) symmetry, 2-dimensional principal orbits. 
In this Appendix we shall describe the family of vacuum, maximal globally hyperbolic 
space-times 4M which admit compact, connected, orientable Cauchy surfaces aE with 
Cauchy data invariant under an S0(3) action with two dimensional principal orbitsa. 
The results presented below are a global version of the generalized Birkhoff theorem ( cf. 
Appendix B to [66]). 
As has been shown in Ref. [45], one has aE ~ S1 X S2 or sa or JPa or JPa# IPa 
(connected sum of two projective spaces), and the action of S0(3) is in each case unique 
up to homomorphism of S0(3) and diffeomorphism of aE. S1 x S 2 as well as sa or JPa 
or lPa# IPa are of the form 
(2.3.1) 
where 
• in the S1 x S 2 case the relation " rv " identifies {0} x S 2 with {1} x S 2 via the 
identity map from S2 to S2, 
• in the IPa# IPa case " rv " identifies {0} x S2 with itself via the antipodal map 
from S2 to S2 , similarly for { 1} x S2, 
3 The author is grateful to dr G. Cieciura for useful discussions about the results presented here. 
61 
s in the S3 case " "' " shrinks { 0} X S2 to a point Po and { 1} X S2 to a point Pll 
o in the JP3 case " ""' " shrinks { 0} x S2 to a point p0 and identifies { 1} x S2 with 
itself via the antipodal map. 
From [45] it follows that in all cases there exist coordinates ('ljJ, (8, qy)) on [0, 1] X 8 2 such 
that the action of 80(3) consists of 'ljJ-independent rotations of 8 2 , which implies that 
any S0(3) invariant metric on 3 1.:: in these coordinates takes the form 
(2.3.2) 
Let eE, g;j, K;j) be any 80(3) invariant Cauchy data, let (4 M, 1) be the maximal globally 
hyperbolic development thereof, let t be a time function in a neighborhood 0 of 3 1.:: such 
that for T E (t1, t 2 ) the group S0(3) acts on the level sets Ir = {p : t(p) = T} of 
t by isometries (cf. Section 2.1). By Lie dragging along the normals to Ir the above 
coordinates ( 'ljJ, ( 8, <jJ)) can be extended to 0, and one finds that in this coordinate system 
the metric takes the form 
(2.3.3) 
for some (strictly) positive functions F, X, and a non-negative function Y; Y strictly 
positive for~~' E (0, 1), and 
111 if 3 2:: ~ 8 3 the area function Y vanishes at 'ljJ = 0 and 'ljJ = 1 only, 
e if 3 1.:: ~ JP3 the function Y vanishes at 1p = 0 only. 
In order to analyze the constraint equations it is useful to introduce the following "null" 
derivatives: 
We have the following: 
62 
Lemma 2.3.1 Let Cauchy data for a metric of the form {2.3.3} satisfy the vacuum 
constraint equations, suppose that there exists tP+ such that 
Then 
t/J < tP+ =? Y+(O,t/>) < 0, 
t/J > tP+ =? Y+(O,t/>) > 0. 
The same statement holds with the subscript "+ '' replaced by the subscript "- ". 
Proof: From equations (A.2)-(A.3) on p. 370 in (66] we have 
thus 
ay± X 
atjJ = h± y± + 2Y ' 
ax XY'f 
h± = ±F 7it - 2Y ' 
(2.3.4) 
(2.3.5) 
(2.3.6) 
0 
Lemma 2.3.1 implies, that in the vacuum the topologies S3 and JP3 are excluded: 
Proposition 2.3.1 Let (3E,g;j,I<ij) be S0(3) invariant Cauchy data, 3 E compact, con­
nected, orientable. Then 3 E ~ S 1 x S2 or IP3 #, JP3 ; moreover, V'Y is timelike, where Y 
is the areafunction (cf. {2.3.3}}. 
Proof: Suppose first, that 3 E ~ S3 • By construction of the coordinate system (2.3.3) 
we must have 
Y(t = 0, t/> = 0) = 0 , 
Y(t = 0, t/> = 1) = 0, 
aY 
atjJ (t = 0, tP = 0) > 0 ' 
aY -(t = 0, tP = 0) = 0' at 
63 
aY -(t = O,t/> = 1) = 0 at (2.3.7) 
( cf. e.g. Appendix C to [32] for a detailed description of functions and tensors invariant 
under in that reference rotations around a single axis are considered, the results 
generalize to the full rotation group in a rather straightforward manner). 
that 
1) < 0' 
therefore there exist ?/J± such that 
which makes inconsistent with (2.3.4), thus on S3 no solutions of the vacuum 
constraints exist. Since a solution of the vacuum constraints on JP3 can be pulled-back 
to S3 via the r"'""'"'nrr map, no such solutions exist on 1P3 either. It thus remains to 
that on S1 x and JP3 # JP3 the vector field 'VY must be timelike. Let us first 
note that the map (j) : [0, 1] X --> [0, 1] X S 2 defined by 
?jJ E [0, ~] , 
Rw), ·if;E 1], 
where R is the antipodal map, extends to a double covering map <1> : S1 x S2 --> JP3 # IP3 
Since S1 X 5'2 is itself covered 1R x S2 it is sufficient to show timelikeness of 'VY for 
solutions (with period 1) of the constraint equations on 1R X S2 • Suppose that 
there exists a point ~J+ such that 
Y_(?f-) = 0, or both, then from 
( 1f+) = 0, or there exists a point 'lj,_ such that 
it follows 
(2.3.9) 
which contradicts periodicity of Y±, thus neither nor Y_ can change signs. Let ?fo be 
a local extremum of then ~~ ( t = 0, ?fo) = 0, and we have 
which implies 
64 
D 
One can now proceed as in the Appendix B to [66] to conclude that 3 :E can be deformed 
in 4 lVI in such a way that ~~ = 0, a reparametrization of the 'tj;'s leads to ~~ = 0, A and 
f as in (2.3.2), and thus in both S1 x .'P and JP3 # IP3 cases one obtains a two-parameter 
family of metrics on 4 _M (parametrized by the area A of the group orbits and the length 
.f of closed geodesics orthogonal to the orbits 4 ) which are, locally, isometric to the metric 
under the horizon of the Schwarzschild-Kruskal-Szekeres manifold. 
It may be of some interest to describe a larger family of space-times, with S1 x S2 spatial 
topology, the metric of which is locally isometric to the "r < 2m Schwarzschild metric", 
but on which no global action of S0(3) by isometries exists. Consider the metric (2.3.2) 
with ~~ = * = 0 on the manifold (2.3.1) in which the relation " "' " identifies {0} x 52 
with { 1} x S 2 via a rotation w E S0(3) of S2 : 
(O,p),...., (l,wp), wE 50(3). 
In this way one obtains a five-parameter family of smooth metrics, parametrized by5 
(f, A, w) E (0, oo) X (0, oo) x 50(3). The four-dimensional metric is, again, loca.lly 
isometric to the "r < 2m Schwarzschild" metric with an appropriately chosen m. 
2.4 Spatially compact Bianchi I space=times. 
In this Section we shall discuss the space of maximally developed, globally hyperbolic, 
smooth Hausdorff vacuum metrics with compact U(l) x U(l) x U(l) symmetric Cauchy 
surfaces 3:E. G = U(l) X U(l) X U(l) symmetry implies that 3:E is a three dimensional 
torus T 3 ( cf. e.g. [45]) and the action of G is transitive on 3:E, choosing group coordinates 
one 3 :E and the geodesic distance on geodesics normal to 3 :E as a time coordinate in 4 I\1. 
4Strict!y speaking, f is the length of such geodesics when 3 2; = 5 1 x 5 2 , and half of the length when 
3y; = JP3# JP3. 
5It is easily seen that two such metrics with w1 =f' w2 will not be isometric: a geodesic orthogonal to 
a sphere S~. =: { !/; = 1/Jo} and passing through a point p E S~. will again interesect S~. at wp. 
65 
we have 
(2.4.1) 
Let us momentarily forget about the identifications xi = xi + 271" and consider the metric 
(2.4.1) on JR3 • At any chosen timet= to there exists a matrix L~ E SL(3,JR) such that 
(2.4.2) 
Since the right hand side of (2.4.2) is invariant under S0(3) the matrix L~ is not uniquely 
defined, and we may choose wj E 50(3) so that 
(2.4.3) 
by an abuse of notation we have used the symbol L~ to denote Liwj. Let 
(2.4.4) 
at t = to we have 
(2.4.5) 
From 1) the existence of diagonal solutions of the equations of motion, namely the flat 
metrics on JR4 or the Kasner metrics [79] on (0, oo) x Jli3; 2) uniqueness up to coordinate 
transformation of solutions of vacuum Einstein equations; it follows that all solutions can 
be diagonalized for all t and are either Minkowski space-time or the Kasner metrics 6 
P7 = L;p; = 1. (2.4.6) 
Returning to T 3 , the equations (2.4.4), (2.4.6) and (2.4.1) give 
(2.4. 7) 
6This simple argument is due to V.Moncrief. 
66 
in the T3 - Minkowski case, or 
(2.4.8) 
in the T3 - Kasner case. All coordinate transformations preserving (2.4. 7) can be shown 
to be of the form 
t--+ t + T, Zj E SL(3,Z) (detZj = 1,Zj E Z), 
(2.4.9) 
while those preserving (2.4) are 
t --+ t, Zj E S£(3, Z), (2.4.10) 
Let Diffo(4M) be the path-connected component of the identity of the diffeomorphism 
group of 4M. Elementary singular homology considerations show that the diffeomor­
phisms (2.4.9)- (2.4.10) are in Diffo(4 M) if and only if ZJ = 15}. It follows that the set 
of maximally developed globally hyperbolic Hausdorff Bianchi I space-times with spa­
tially compact Cauchy surfaces divided by Diff0 can be given the structure of a manifold 
which is the union of three disconnected pieces: 
• a six dimensional manifold of metrics (2.4. 7) (parametrized by 9ii ), 
• a ten dimensional manifold of metrics (2.4) (one parameter for the p;'s, nine for 
the L}'s), and 
• a ten dimensional manifold of metrics which differ from (2.4) by a change of time 
orientation, t --+ -t. 
The subset of extendible metrics of the above type consists of six disconnected nine 
dimensional submanifolds, which consist of Kasner metrics with one of the parameters 
p; equal to 1, thus a generic maximal Bianchi I space-time is inextendible. 
67 
Chapter 3 
U(1) x U(1) stability of the (~,~, -1) 
Kasner metrics. 
In this Chapter we present the proof of Theorem 1.5.2, namely that the singularity of 
(PbP2,P3) = (~,~, -~) (or permutation thereof) Kasner metrics is stable under U(l) x 
U(l) symmetric perturbations. The problem reduces to establishing a priori estimates 
for a Lorentzian harmonic-type map from two-dimensional Minkowski space-time to 
the unit two-dimensional hyperboloid of constant negative curvature. We shall start 
by analyzing the harmonic map equations, the geometric interpretation of the estimates 
proved below will be given in Section 3.5. 
3.1 Introduction - notation 
Let M be a Riemannian manifold with scalar product ( , ). Let to < 0, let x(t,B) 
[to, 0) x Sl -+ M satisfy 
DXt DXo -----= Dt DB (3.1.1 ) 
where Xt == ax&~,o), Xo == ax~~o), D denotes the Levi-Civita connection of ( , ), 
68 
(Y) or IYI will be used to denote j(Y, Y); we shall identify S1 with { (;/ E [0, 27r]jmod21r }. 
We shall throughout use the notation 
(k) - (_!!_) (k-1) X - DB Xe, 
we shall always assume X1(t0 ,·), Xa(t0 ,·) E H1 (S1 ). K(,) denotes the curvature tensor 
of ( , ) defined by 
I<(X, Y)Z = DxDvZ- DvDxZ- Drx,YJZ, 
We use IKI to denote an upper bound on the sectional curvatures, and jDKj, etc. to 
denote the Riemannian norm of the tensor DK, etc. The matrix 'Tftt" will denote the two 
dimensional Minkowski metric, 'IJttv dx~-' dxv = -dt 2 + d82 • For it I < 1r it will often be 
convenient to use the coordinates 
v=t-B, 
so that 
3.2 Pointwise Estimates 
In this Section we shall prove some rough pointwise estimates as t __. 0 for solutions of 
(3.1.1). The ideas of the proofs are inspired by some unpublished work by V. Moncrief; 
the author is grateful to V. Moncrieffor making his results available prior to publication. 
Lemma 3.2.1 X(k) satisfies the equation 
r(!!_)z-(_!!_)2]x(k) = -~ DX(k) N(k). 
L Dt DO t Dt + (3.2.1) 
If for all multi-indices 0 :::; ial :::; k - 1 we have 
69 
and if 
II< I+ !DKI + ... Jni<>J-l I< I ::; c2 , 
then 
2. We also have the estimate 
k 
IN<kll ::; L: F1( c1, c2, i, k) Jx<;>Jitli-k-2 (3.2.2) 
i=l 
where F, F1 are some constants depending upon the arguments listed. 
Proof: Applying (f50)k to both sides of (3.1.1) one obtains 
[(.!}_)2-(!!_)2] x<kJ = -~ DX(k) L(k)- M(k) 
Dt DB t Dt + t ' 
with 
(.!}_)2 x<kJ _ (!!_)k DXt 
Dt DB Dt ' 
(_!!_) k x - .!}_ x<kJ = De t Dt . 
We have the recurrence relations for k 2: 1 
with 
and part 1 follows by induction. To prove part 2 one shows by induction that there exists 
a set of linear operators A (k,i) such that 
k 
N(k) = L A(k,i)(X(i)) 
i=l 
(e.g. A(l,l)(Y) = K(Y,Xt)Xt) and the bounds on JA(k,i)l are established by an induction 
argument. 0 
70 
Lemma 3.2.2 Let Tl'v be a symmetric traceless tenso·r, let jl' = T~'v·v· We have 
!Ttt(il, B) I < sup (ITttl(to, 8) + ITte!(to, B)) (3.2.3) 
?,i>E[B-t, +to,B+t,-to] 
+1
11 
sup Wt!(t,B)+!Jel(t,B))dt. 
to ?,i>E[8-t1 +t,B+t 1 -t] 
(3.2.4) 
Tuu,v = 
therefore 
adding these equations, setting .A = 2(t1 - one 1s elementary manipulations led to 
__ l rt, {(J.t -:- ·ie)' (t 81 -+- t1- {\ .L 
2 Jto · ' .J ' - ' I I 
· 1 { 7' ..j. '1' ) ($ e ' ' t \ I 1 ('J' +2\J.tt .-~w I."O' 1-t-£1- oJT2 -'-tt-
and the result follows. 0 
Let us recall Gromwall's lemma: 
Lemma 3.2.8 Let f,x E C1([t0 ,0)), :y E C0([t0 ,0)), y ~ 0, satisfyfort E [to,O) 
f(t) ~ + r y(s)f(s)ds. Jto 
Then 
( rt · ti d . . ( f' ' f(t) ~ x(t 0 )exp l y(s)d.s) + J dx(s) exp{ /_ y(u)du~ds. 
\Jto , ./to i l.s J 
Proposition 3.2.1 Let. x(t0 , B) E Ck(S1 ), k ~ 1, X1(t0 ,B) E Ck- 1 (51). For all t 2:: t0 
w-e ha.v~t 1 
1The proof of poi.nt a} of Proposition 3.2.1 is a slight variation of an unpublished argument of V . 
.Moncrief. 
71 
a) 
b) If k ?. 2, and if 
IKI + IDKI + ... + ID<k-2) Kl :::; c2 
then there exist constants C depending only upon the arguments listed such that, 
for alll :::; ial :::; k, 
ID"xi(t, B):::; C(lal, to, c2, IIXo(to)llclaJ-1' IIXt(to)llclaJ-1) lti- 1"1• (3.2.7) 
Proof. Let 
(adding a subscript means differentiation). We have 
j~k) = T~k)~v = ~ 8~((X~k)) 2 - (Xt(k))2 ) -lti(X~kl, N(k)) + E(kllti(Xv, K(Xv, X~")X(k)), 
(3.2.8) 
E(k) = 0 if k = 0, E(k) = 1 otherwise. For k = 0 it follows 
For to :::; t :::; h let 
(k)( ) sup Ttt t, '¢ , 
,PE[O-t1 +t,O+t1 -t] 
h(kl(t) sup ITt~)l(t, '¢). 
1/JE[8-t1 +t,O+tt -t] 
From Lemma 3.2.2 we have 
' t f(O)( ) f<0l(t) :::; f<0l(to) + h(0l{to) + f __ s_ ds, 
lto lsi 
72 
so that Gromwall's lemma vvith x(t) = Jf0l(t 0 ) + M0 l(t 0 ), y(t) = ih' gives 
Vto::; tl < 0 j(O)(ti)Jtll < u(o)(to) + h(Ol(to))itol 
< 2f(o)(to)ltol (3.2.9) 
which is equation (3.2.6). To obtain part (b) we shall proceed by induction, suppose 
therefore that (3.2. 7) holds for Ia! ::; k- 1. (3.2.8) and Lemma 3.2.1 yield 
r,(k) 
< -m- + jtjJX}kl!INkl + C21t11Xti!Xei2 JX(k)i 
T(k) 
< +I + {(2t! !Xt(k)l}{2~ FIWk-1} + Cltl-k-2 
lr 
3 T(k) 
< _ _E._ + pz IWzk-2 
2 ltl ' 
T(k) 
< _t_t + fi'21tl-2k-2. 
2Jtl ' ' 
with some constant C = C(Ch Cz), F2 = F2 + CltoJk, and Lemma 3.2.2 gives 
From Gromwall's Lemma one obtains 
so that the result for all the derivatives of the form 
D ( D l i-2. 
Dt DfJJ Xe 
follows. The estimates for the remaining derivatives can be obtained by e.g. commuting 
all the t derivatives to the left, and then using (3.2.1) to replace pairs oft-derivatives by 
pairs of e derivatives. 0 
Remark. If JXel ::; Cjt[>·-l for some A > 0, then a simple modification of the above 
proof gives 
(3.2.11) 
73 
It is tempting to conjecture that this is a sharp estimate: (3.2.11) is indeed the best one 
can expect, since this behaviour is displayed by the maps considered in Appendix B, with 
any 0 :SA< 1. 
3.3 Integral "Decay" Estimates 
Proposition 3.3.1 Let x E Ci([t0 ,0) x S1 ) and let Xe(t0 ,·), Xt(t 0 ,·) E H;(S 1 ), i 2 1. 
There exist constants depending only upon the arguments listed such that 
1. V 1 :S lad :Si+l, 
g("'l(t) = f dB 1ti21"11D01 xl2 :S C (Ia!, IIXe(to)IIHiai-1 (S1 )' IIXt(to)IIHial-dS')' to) 
(3.3.1) 
2. If at least one differentiation is a () differentiation we have 
lim g("l(t) = 0. 
t->0 
(3.3.2) 
3. If at least one differentiation is a e differentiation then 9 <~:?) E £1([t0 , 0]) and 
(3.3.3) 
4. g(tl(s) tends to a limit ass goes to zero. 
Remark: The results above are close to being sharp, because, as shown in Appendix 
B (cf. Proposition B.l.l), for any E E [0, 1) there exist solutions of (3.1.1) such that we 
have IX a I ~ Ct<-l, !Xee I ~ Ct<- 2 , etc. 
Proof. Let 
y(k) = iti2k+2 r(x(k) ![(kl) _ 1 'll (X(k)" X(kl)} 
Jl.V 1_ f-1. ' ..L V 2 'i Jl.Y '} a ' 
e(k)(t) = f dBT;~k). 
74 
We have 
(3.3.4) 
;;(k) = 0 for k = 0, E(k) = 1 otherwise, so that for t1 > to 
(3.3.5) 
which for k = 0 reads 
(3.3.6) 
so that e(0l(t) is strictly decreasing and therefore tends to a limit, e<0l(O), which gives 
(3.3.1) for o: = {)oro: = t. (3.3.6) and Lebesgue monotone convergence theorem imply 
§dO!ti(X0 ) 2 E L1 ((t0 ,0]). To show (3.3.3) for higher derivatives we shall proceed by 
induction, suppose therefore that for 1 S k S i - 1 
ro e<kl(t) 1 - 11-dt < oo. 
Jto t 
(3.3.7) 
Part 2 of Lemma 3.2.1 gives 
,\; 
lz + C'E !tlzi-1IX(ill2 (3.3.8) 
i=l 
for some constant C. From Proposition 3.2.1, point 2, we have ~;(k)IXeiii<(Xe,Xt)X(k)l S 
C!ti-k-s for some constant C, so that from (3.3.5) we have 
e(kl(tl) S e(kl(to)- t dt ~ d() !tl2k+1{(k- ~)(XJkl) 2 + (k + l)(X~k)) 2 } 
Jto J 
(3.3.9) 
By hypothesis the integrand of the last integral at the right-hand side of (3.3.9) is in 
L1 ([t0 ,0]); therefore by Lebesgue monotone convergence theorem 
(3.3.10) 
75 
(3.3.10) implies that there exists a sequence t; --+ 0 such that e(k)(t;) --+ 0, and from 
(3.3.5) we have 
e(k)(t) = e(k)(t;) -l; dt f dO.Jt(k). (3.3.11) 
(3.3.4), (3.3.7), (3.3.8) and (3.3.10) imply that .lt(k) is in V([t 0,0] x S1 ) so that we may 
pass to the limit t; --+ 0 to obtain 
e<k>(t) = -1° dt f dO .ft(k). (3.3.12) 
(3.3.12) shows in particular that limt-.o e(k)(t) = 0, which is (3.3.2). Finally let h(t) = 
f 1ti21Xol2 (t,O). For t2 > t1 we have 
h(t2)- h(tt) = r2 k(t) dt , ltl 
2h(t) f 2 
k(t) = --1t-l + 2 dOt (Xo, Xot), 
by what has been said k(t) E V([t 0 , 0]) and an argument along the lines of the proof of 
(3.3.12) shows that (3.3.2) holds for a= 0. The estimate (3.3.3) follows from (3.3.10) by 
commuting pairs oft derivatives with pairs of 0 derivatives using equation (3.1.1). D 
3.4 Pointwise "Decay" Estimates 
For t0 $ t $ 0 let Cf0 denote the solid truncated light cone 
Cio = {(s,O),to $ s $ t,s $0$ -s}. 
Let B(t) denote the "space ball", B(t) = {(s, 0) : s = t, t $ 0 $ -t}. Let ~0 , L~0 be the 
right and left truncated light-rays from (0, 0), cf. Figure 3.4.1: 
L:0 = {(s,O): to$ s $ t,O = s} 
H!o = {(s,O):to$s$t,0=-s} 
By proposition 3.2.1 we can define 
Vo =sup ltiiXtl < oo. 
0~0 
76 
(3.4.1) 
/ 
Figure 3.4.1: Truncated light cone. 
Lemma 3.4.1 Let 
There exist t1 independent constants C1 (M,t 0 ), C1 (k,fi,1,t 0 ), C2(k,M,t 0 ) such that for 
all t0 :S: t 1 < 0, k ~ 1, we have 
a) 
1ti2 {4(Xee)2 + (Xat}2 } :S: 6 ].,1 (JI<Iv5)2 1Xel2 + C, 
v!o 
b) 
and IKI is defined by 
= sup IKJ(p) = 
pEM 
sup 
pEM 
A,B,C,DETpM 
I(K(A, B)C, D) I 
IAIIBIICIIDI ' 
where K is the curvature tensor of ( M, ( , ) ) . 
Proof. Let 
r(k) = jtl2k(f X(k) x<kl\ _ 1, (X(k)a X("l)) 
- f.J.V ' \ j.t ' V I 2-'i!J.V ' a 4 
77 
We have 
T(k) = _l T(k)v ull uu,v 2 J1 ,v 
= _Jtj;- 1 {(2k -l)(X~kl,x1kl) + (k -l)(X}kl) 2 + k(X~kl) 2 } 
+ Jt12k (X~k)' N(k)) + ~E(klJtj2k(X,, I<(Xu, X")X(k))' 
T(k) _l T(k)v vll 
vv,u 2 1.1. 1ll 
= _JtJ:- 1 {(1- 2k)(X~k), Xt(k)) + (k- l)(Xt(k)}2 + k(X~k)) 2 } 
+ Jtt (X£kl' N(k)) + ~E(kljtj2k(X,, K(Xv, X")X(k)) , 
c(k) = 0 if k = 0, t(k) = 1 otherwise, therefore 
:u (uT~~l) + :v (vT~~l) = Jtt { (k + l)JX~k)J2 + kJXt(k)lz + (2k ~~1)8 (X~kl ,)dkl)} 
_JtJ2k+ 1 (X(k) + !!_ X(k) N(kl)- ~t(kljtj 2 k(X K(X + !!_Xo X"')X(kl) .(3.4.2) 2 t Jt I B ' • 2 Oi' t Jt I , 
Integrating (3.4.2) over CJ~ yields, for k 2 1, 
1 '1 Jt12k(3JX~kJ 12 + Jxfkl 12) - 21 't IWk+l ( x:k) + let! x~k), N<kJ) 
c,o c,o 
< Jt12k+l f (JxJkll2 + IXel2 + 28 (Xt(kl,x~kl)) dejt1 
JB(t) jtj to 
+2t(k) fc:~ jJtj2k(Xa, K(Xt + J~IXe, X")X(k))l , (3.4.3) 
where f(t)J!~ = f(t 1 )- f(t 0 ). Fork= 1 we have 
and straightforward manipulations lead to 
and we have used proposition 3.2.1 to estimate the integrals at the right hand side of 
(3.4.3) by a constant C. Lemma 3.2.1 part 2 and an induction argument yield similarly 
78 
which had to be established. 0 
Remark. If k = 0 we have N(o) = 0 and (3.4.2) integrated over Ci~ yields 
fa:~ (!Xe!2 - l:i(Xe,Xt)) 5: C (3.4.4) 
for some t1-independent constant C. 
Proposition3.4.1 Let t0 < 0, let x(t0 ,·) E Ck(S 1 ), X1(t0 ,·) E Ck- 1 (S1 ), k > 2, 
suppose that either 
or 
Then for all 0 5: Jal 5: k - 1 
lim tial+ljDa .Xe! = 0. 
(t,&)-(0,0) 
(t,&)ec? 0 
(3.4.5) 
Proof, (3.4.4) shows that without loss of generality we can suppose that (3.4.5) holds. 
Lemma 3A.l, part a) shows that 
r 2 2 
I t (IXeel + IXet < oo , 
.IC?0 
therefore for all e > 0 there exists 5 > 0 such that for all ltl 5: 8 
{ ,12 t 2 ( !Xael2 + IXetl2 ) + f ,12 IXe 12 5: E. 
Jc, Jc, 
1 
For 0 5: t 5: min(jt 0 j, n"/2) let ft : c-:_J -+ JR+ U {0} be defined by 
1 
C=i ::7 0) -+ ft(s, IJ) = tjXeJ(ts, tO). 
(3.4.6) 
By (3.4.6) and by the pointwise estimates of proposition 3.2.1 for any p 2:: 2 and fort 5: 8 
we have 
fc-~18~-'ftiP < C(p)e, 
-2 
(3.4.7) 
fc-~ lftl2 < E, 
-2 
79 
so that setting p equal to, say, 3, one obtains by Sobolev inequality 
_! 
V (s,fJ) E C_:j ift(s, B)i ~ C't. 
so that 
v IOI ~ Jtl jtjJXe(t,O)J ~ C't. 
The higher derivatives estimates follow in a similar way from Lemma 3.4.1, part b). 0 
Proposition 3.4.2 Suppose that JI<Jv5 < 3 ~. Then the conclusion of proposition 3.4.1 
holds. 
Proof. Without loss of generality we may suppose -11' ~ t0 . Let 
Integrating (fe -ft)(OJXel 2 ) over c;~+ and (fa+ ft)(OIXel2 ) on CJ~-, adding the resulting 
identities one obtains 
(3.4.8) 
the estimates of Lemma 3.4.1, part 1, and (3.4.8) give a trindependent bound C1 for 
fB(t) ( ) 1::. therefore 
fa:; (Xe? < cl + 2 fc:~ JtJIXei(IXetl + IXeei) 
< C1 +2(fc,, (Xe)2)t{fc,, Jti2 1Xetl2 )t + (fc,, JtJ2 IXeel2)t} 
to to to 
< cl + (t:l + E2) f t (Xe? + _!_ r t 1ti2 1Xetl2 + _!_ 1 t lti2 1Xeol2 
lc,~ E1 lc,~ t:2 c,~ 
< C' lr 6(v6JI<J)2 3(v5JKJ?] 1 (Xr )2 2 + E1 + + tz + 2 , e , 
~"1 ~'2 c,~ 
where we have used the Schwartz inequality and Lemma 3.4.1, point a). Setting t:1 = 
J6 v6JI<J, E2 = Av51KI one obtains 
(1- 3vl5 v6JI<I) 1 ,, (Xe)2 ~ C2 , c,o 
80 
so that for JK!v~ < (3V6)- 1 
V t0 :S t < 0 1 (x )2 < c - c2 c:0 ° - 3 - (1 - 3v'6v~IKI) ' 
and the Lebesgue monotone convergence theorem implies that the hypotheses of propo-
sition 3.4.1 hold. D 
Propositions 3.2.1 and 3.4.2 imply: 
Corollary 3.4.1 Let x be a Ci, i 2:: 2 solution of (3.1.1) and suppose that 
Then the conclusion of proposition 3.4.1 holds. 
3.5 The Stability Theorem. 
Let ('E,g,K) be U(l) x U(l) symmetric Cauchy data, E ~ T3 , let Xa = X~ 8~., a= 1,2 
be the Killing vectors generated be the U(l) x U(l) action. It has been shown in [32] 
that if one assumes 
(3.5.1) 
then there exists a coordinate system { t E ( -oo, 0), B, xa E (0, 21f]lmod21l", a = 1, 2} in 
which the metric takes the form 
(3 .. 5.2) 
+(cosh p - cos¢ sinh p) ( dx 2 ) 2 , 
B=B(t,B), p=p(t,B), ¢=</;(t,B), 
where ) and ga are real constants, ,\ > 0. For a metric of the form (3.5.2) the dynamical 
part of Einstein equations reduces ( cf. e.g. [32], or [62]) to harmonic-map-type equations 
81 
(3.1.1) for a map x(t,O) = (p(t,O),¢>(t,O)): (-oo,O) x S1 ---+ 1{2 , where 1{2 ~ JR2 is the 
unit hyperboloid with the metric 
We also have the constraint equations 
(3.5.3) 
(3.5.4) 
The main result of this chapter is the following: 
Theorem 3.5.1 Let~ ::::J T 3 and let (g0 , Ko) be Cauchy data for a Kasner metric with 
exponents (pt,p 2 ,p3 ) = (~, ~' -V, or permutation thereof. There exists f > 0 such that 
for all U(l) X U(l) symmetric Cauchy data (g, K) E C""(~) satisfying (3.5.1), for which 
ii(g- go, K- Ko)iiHt(E)$£2(E) < f, 
the maximal globally hyperbolic Hausdorff development ( M, 1) of (E, g, K) is future inex­
tendible. Moreover on every future inextendible timelike curve in M the curvature scalar 
IRa,a"Ys R"'.8"Y6 i tends to infinity in finite proper time. 
Remark: If one assumes that the Cauchy data are given directly in the form appropriate 
for a metricofthe form (3.5.2), then it is sufficient to assume that (g, K) E H1 (~)EBL 2 (~). 
It should he pointed out that the construction which leads from general coordinates to 
the coordinates of (3.5.2) decreases the degree of differentiability of the components of 
the metric tensor. 
To prove Theorem 3.5.1 we shall need the following: 
Proposition 3.5.1 Let r be a future inextendible timelike curve in a vacuum space-time 
with a metric of the form (3.5.2), then r reaches t = 0 in finite proper time. 
82 
Proof: Let r = {x~-'(s)}, where sis a proper time along r, with t(s) being an increasing 
function of s. From IJ.tvx~-'x" = -1 we have 
dt e8 - > 1. ds -
The constraint equation (3.5.3) and Proposition 3.2.1 give 
-1 + E1 < 8B < _2_ 
4t - at - 4t ' 
where 
E1 =sup t 2 [1Xtl2 + JXol2] < oo 
t:2:io 
which implies, for some constant C, 
so that (3.5.5) implies, for s2 2 St, 
Cjtj- 114 ~: 2 1 ===> Sz::; s1 + 4C(Jt(sl)l 314 -jt(s2)j 314)/3, 
thus r reaches t = 0 in finite proper time. 
(3.5.5) 
D 
Proof of Theorem 3.5.1: Consider the map X 0 (t,B) = (p0 (t,B),¢>o(t,())) = (0,0); it is 
easily seen that X 0 solves the dynamic equations (3.1.1 ), integrating (3.5.2) one finds that 
the corresponding metric is the Kasner metric with exponents (PI,Pz,ps) = (3, ~' -~). 
It follows from Corollary 3.4.1 that for all x(to, 8), X1(ta, B) satisfying 
we have 
(3.5.6) 
moreover from Proposition 3.2.1, point a) it follows that 
(3 .. 5.7) 
A SHEEP calculation gives 
-2B 
Rfi, e {(1 ziX 121 ,,p. BM } ;;a{3 = &z - t t 1 n v&/3 + ;;a{3 ' (3.5.8) 
83 
where hats refer to the orthonormal frame 
e 1 = (.Aitl)112eP/ 2 [cos(¢>/2)(dx + ldB) + sin(¢>/2)(dy + ldB)] , 
e 2 = (.Aitl)112e-P/ 2 [- sin(¢>/2)(dx + ldO) + cos(¢>/2)(dy + ldB)] , 
with x = x 1 , y = x2 , and where the non-vanishing components of Ail v&S are 
vP = tp,1 , vq, = tsinhp¢>, 1 , 
while for Bil v&.S the following estimations hold 
(3.5.9) 
IB'" o&.SI:::; C [t21Xel2 (1 + 1t11Xtl + 1t11Xel) + t 2 1XtiiXal(l + ltiiXtl) + t 2 iXeel + t 2 1Xtel] 
(3.5.10) 
(3.5.6) - (3.5.7) allow us to neglect all the terms involving Bilv&.S when calculating a= 
Raf31 8 R 01f315 to obtain 
Let 
a = 2B +! ln it!, ao =sup a( to, 8) . e 
By equation (3.5.3) the function a is monotonically decreasing, therefore 
(3.5.11) 
(3.5.12) 
which together with (3.5. 7) implies that there exists E > 0 such that for t ;:::: it, t 1 large 
enough, we have 
t 
ia(t, 8)1 > W . 
84 
By Proposition 3.5.1 every future inextendible timelike curve reaches t = 0 in finite time, 
and Proposition C.2.4 establishes our claims. 0 
The following result proves existence of curvature singularities in polarized Gowdy metrics 
on T 3 without smallness hypotheses: 
Proposition 3.5.2 Let x be a C1 solution of (3.1.1} such that Xe(t0 , ·), Xt(t 0 , ·) E 
H1 (S1), let 
be the quadmtic curvature scalar of the associated Gowdy space-time. Suppose that 
iti!Xt!(t, ·) does not converge to 1 in L2 (S1 ) as t goes to zero. Then there exists a 
sequence of points (t;,Bi), t;-+ 0, such that 
for some t > 0. 
Remarks: 
l. Note that a sufficient condition for convergence in L 2 ( S1 ) is pointwise convergence,'' 
. so that Proposition 3.5.2 implies in particular that if it11X11( t, ·) converges pointwise 
to something different from 1 as t tends to zero, then there must be a curvature 
singularity somewhere on the boundary t = 0. 
2. The proof of Proposition 3.5.2 does not imply existence of a singularity on the whole 
boundary t = 0 since there may be subsets of the set t = 0 on which Jt IJXt[ ( t, ·) 
converges to 1. It might happen that the metric is ext.endible through such subsets 
-this occurs indeed for some polarized Gowdy metrics (37] [36]. 
Proof. From the proof of Theorem 3.5.1 one obtains 
(3.5.13) 
85 
1 2 2 ••• ~ 
(31 = 8(1- t IXtl )Bp_pc,~AJJ."OI , 
therefore, by (3.5.12), 
(3.5.14) 
where ao has been defined in (3.5.11 ). Suppose that 1 - IWIXt 12 does not converge to 0 
in L2 (S 1 ), therefore there exists t > 0 and a sequence t; /' 0 such that 
Proposition 3.2.1 and (3.5.10) imply, 
v jt,v,&,~ (3.5.15) 
which together with proposition 3.3.1, point 2, gives 
It follows that there exists t( f) < 0 such that for all 0 > t > t( f) we have 
which can be made arbitrarily small by an appropriate choice of 8 for t large enough, so 
that for t > t( E) we can also require 
It follows that for t; > t( e) we have 
f 
2JrE 
a( t;, 8) dB > lt;J3 , 
therefore there exist points 8; such that 
0 
86 
Appendix A 
On the ''hyperboloidal initial data", 
and Penrose conditions,. 
Let us briefly recall the conformal framework introduced by Penrose [104] to describe 
the behaviour of physical fields at null infinity. Given a, say vacuum, smooth "physical" 
space- time ( M, i') one associates to it a smooth "unphysical space- time" ( M, 1) and a 
smooth function n on M, such that M is a subset of M and 
dfl(p) -::/:- 0 for p E oM, 
(A.O.l) 
(A.0.2) 
(A.0.3) 
where (JjiJ is the boundary of in M should be stressed that in this section a notation 
inverse to that used in 1.6 is used: tilded quantities denote the physical ones, while non­
tilded quantities denote the unphysical (conformally rescaled) ones). It is common usage 
in general relativity to use the symbol I for oM, and we shall sometimes do so. If 2:: 
is a hypersurface in M, by I+ we shall denote the connected component of I which 
intersects the causal future of E. The hypothesis of smoothness of (M, /, 0) and the fact 
that ( M, ..Y) is vacuum imposes several restrictions on various fields; if one defines ( cj. 
[104]) 
(A.0.4) 
87 
with an analogous definition for the tilded quantities, one has 
(A.0.5) 
where V' ~-' is the covariant derivative of the metric 'Y~J.v· (A.0.2) and (A.0.5) imply 
V'" n V',. Olau = 0 (A.0.6) 
(V'~-' V'..,n- ~ V'"V',.n"f~-',_,)iau = o. (~.0.7) 
Suppose that E c M is a spacelike hypersurface in (M,"{), let t = En M, aE = 
at= En aM, and let 9ij, K;j, respectively Yij, K;j, be the induced metric and extrinsic 
curvature of E in (M,"f), respectively t in (M,'7). If we denote by Lii and Di the 
traceless part of J<ii = gik gil K kl, f<ii = gik gil K kl, 
(A.0.8) 
one finds 
K =OK- 3n" n,,., (A.0.9) 
where n" is the unit normal to E for the metric"{, and I · ih denotes the tensor norm in 
a Riemannian metric h. Since n"' is timelike and V'O(p) is null for pEat we have 
Kiat = -3n"' n ... lat ~ o, (A.O.lO) 
because the scalar product of two non-vanishing non-spacelike vectors cannot change 
sign. From (A.0.2) we also have 
and since V'O is null non-vanishing at at the equations (A.0.9)-(.t\.0.10) imply 
. ([{)21 D'OD;Oiat = 3 at> 0, (A.O.ll) 
where D; is the Riemannian connection of the metric 9ii. To summarize, necessary 
conditions for an initial data set (t,g, K) to arise from an "extended initial data set 
(E, g, K) intersecting a smooth I" are 
88 
Cl. There exists a Riemannian manifold ('E, g), g E Ck('E), such that f: is a submanifold 
of 'E with smooth boundary of:. Moreover there exists a function 0 E Ck('E) such 
that 
fllat = 0, 
(A.O.l2) 
(A.0.13) 
C2. The symmetric tensor field J{ij satisfies, for some I{ E ck-l(:E), Dj E ck-l(E), 
kiat is nowhere vanishing, 
(A.0.14) 
(A.O.l5) 
(A.O.l6) 
If there existed "a lot" of space-times satisfying the Penrose conformal conditions, there 
should exist "a lot" of initial data satisfying Cl-C2. It is therefore natural to ask the 
question, can one construct such data sets? This involves constructing solutions of the 
scalar constraint equation, 
(A.0.17) 
where R(!j) is the Ricci scalar of the metric g, and the vector constraint equation, 
(A.O.l8) 
where fJ is the Riemannian connection of the metric g, under appropriate asymptotic 
conditions. No general method of producing solutions of (A.0.17)-(A.O.l8) is known, 
unless one assumes 
C3. 
(A.0.19) 
Under (A.0.19) the scalar and the vector constraint equations decouple, and the well 
known Choquet- Bruhat- Lichnerowicz- York conformal procedure allows one to construct 
89 
solutions of (A.0.17)-(A.O.l8). An initial data set satisfying Cl-C3 will be called a Ck 
hyperboloidal initial data set (smooth if k = oo), while conditions Cl- C2 will be called 
Penrose's Ck conditions. Without loss of generality we may normalize f<. so that 
(A.0.20) 
and ( A.O.l7)-( A.O.l8) can be rewritten as 
(A.0.21) 
(A.0.22) 
To construct solutions of (A.0.21)-(A.0.22) one can proceed as follows: fix a compact 
Riemannian manifold (L., g), let E be an open submanifold of L. with compact closure 
and with smooth boundary BE, and let h be any defining function for BE (by definition, 
and h(p) = 0 =} p E BE), set 
- ~-2 • 
9ij = ~ ~ g ij. 
Given a smooth traceless symmetric tensor field L ij on L. satisfying 
~ 0 0.. 0 ?0 .. 
Di(rf L ')) = 0 ==? D i(f!0• L '3 ) = 0, (A.0.23) 
where lJ, D are the Riemannian connections of the metrics g, g, it is not too difficult 
to check that the fields 
will satisfy (A.0.21)-(A.0.22) if 
(A.0.24) 
90 
where b. = fi D; is the Laplacian of the metric g;j. If moreover 
<Plat = 1 
ILiulat 0. 
then ('E, g, k) will satisfy Cl-C3. In [2] [3] the following is proved: 
(A.0.25) 
(A.0.26) 
Theorem A.0.2 For any smooth ('f:, g , n, L) as above there exists a solution of (A. 0.24)­
(A.0.25), moreover: 
1. For given (I:, 'E) and for an open dense set {in C00 (2::) topology) of (g 'h, L) the 
function q.-2 can be extended to a C2 function from 'E toE, but not to a C3 function 
on :E (the third derivatives of any extension of¢> will logarithmically blow up as one 
approaches o'E); in particular for gener·ic (in the above sense) triples (g 'n, l) 
the initial data set ('E, g, i<) will display asymptotic behaviour incompatible with 
Penrose's C4 conditions. 
2. There exists a "large set" of non-generic (g , n, L) for which n = q.-2 h can be 
smoothly extended from 'E to E. 
It should be emphasized that in Theorem A.0.2 no hypotheses on the topology of E, 
'E and a'E are made, thus the resulting space-time may have a conformal boundary 
consisting of several connected components of varying topology (recall that e.g. some 
Robinson- Trautman space-times admit a smooth I the "spatial" topology of which is 
not a sphere). Let us also note that even considering only those data sets for which 
l = 0, or for which vj vanishes on a'E to some desired order, point (1) above will still 
hold in the sense that for generic (g , h) and L 's vanishing to some prescribed order (or 
even e.g. identically vanishing) no C3 extensions of¢> from f; to E will exist. 
To complete the construction of initial data sets one also has to produce solutions of 
(A.0.23), the standard approach proceeds as follows: Let Ai.i be a traceless tensor field, 
let Xi solve the equation 
(A.0.27) 
91 
The tensor field defined by 
(A.0.28) 
will satisfy (A.0.23). If we want to obtain i}i•s which do not necessarily vanish to second 
order at 8E, we have to admit Aii•s of the form 
Aij = n-2 A.ij, (A.0.29) 
for some smooth A ij, which gives D j Aij = h-3 zi, for some smooth vector field zi, 
nonidentically vanishing at 8E for generic non-vanishing A ij at 8E; note that Xi should 
vanish to third order at 8E if Aii vanishes to second order there). In [2] the following is 
established: 
Theorem A.0.3 Let (.E, g ) be a smooth Riemannian manifold, let E be a smooth sub­
manifold of.E with smooth boundary 8E, with a defining function h. Consider the problem 
o o .. o .. 2 ok 0 •• 
= D;(D'X 3 +D 3 X'-3 D Xkg' 3 )it 
O"Yil-~· (A.0.30) 
where yi is a smooth vector field on .E and a - a negative integer. There exists a 
solution of {A.0.30} of the form 
0 2 0 
X= ncr+ X1 +log f!X1og + Xo, (A.0.31) 
where Xt, Xlog, X 0 are smooth vector fields on .E. For any a f= 0 there exists an 
open dense set of Y 's {in a C00 (.E) topology) for which Xloglat -:/= 0. If a = -1 then 
Xlog = OX!og, for some smooth vector field X1og on .E. If a= 0, X!og = 0. X is unique 
in the class of solutions of the form ( A.0.31}, with smooth X 0 , X 1 and X1og· 
It should be pointed out that for generic A ij, the source term in (A.0.27) with Aii given 
by (A.0.29) will be generic and thus the corresponding solution X will have log terms, 
consequently i}i given by (A.0.28) wil be C1 but not C2 extendible from E to .E. A 
92 
similar thing will happen when considering those A ij which vanish to order one at of:: 
generic such solutions will be C2 but not C3 extendible. On the other hand if A ij vanishes 
to order two or higher at the boundary, then the source term in (A.0.27) will be smooth, 
and so will be the solution X: in this case no log terms occur. 
In order to obtain Cauchy data which can be used in Friedrich's stability theorem, The­
orem 1.6.1, some more restrictions on (f:, g, k) are needed, namely the vanishing at at 
of both the tensor ea{3 defined in Theorem 1.6.1 and of the Weyl tensor. In the case 
of L;i vanishing on of:, it turns out that [3] smooth extendability of the function i1 
across of: is a necessary condition for ea!3iat = C$.,5 lat = 0. (More precisely, under the 
conditions k;jgii = const, L;j I at = 0, one shows [3] that the condition e;j I at = 0 is 
equivalent to the fact that the extrinsic curvature of of: in :E is pure trace; this then 
implies that i1 is smooth up to boundary, and that C$.,slat = 0, moreover Dn and Dnn 
can be chosen so that eai3lat = 0 holds.) Point 1 of Theorem A.0.2 thus shows, that 
generic data constructed by the conformal method will not be regular enough to be used 
in Friedrich's existence theorems. In fact the problem here is much more serious than 
just being one or two degrees of differentiability away from a threshold, because one of 
the fields used in Friedrich's "conformally regular system" is d01 !3'"!5 ::::: n-1 C"',6.,5, where 
C01 13.,6 is the Weyl curvature tensor of the space--time metric, evaluated formally from the 
Cauchy data (g, I<) assuming v;acuum Einstein equations. Whenever C'-' iJ'"!S(P) =;E. 0 for 
p E of:, the field d"' fJ75 blows up at f)f; as 1/fl, and is thus not even in L1 (2::). It should be 
stressed that nevertheless point 2 of Theorem A.0.2 establishes existence of a large class 
of non-trivial data with asymptotic behaviour compatible with the Penrose-Friedrich 
conditions. 
93 
Appendix B 
On a class of u(l) x U(l) syni'metric 
metrics found by V .. Moncrief .. 
In this Appendix we shall prove that "strong cosmic censorship" holds in a six parameter 
family of non-polarized U(l) x U(l) symmetric metrics found by Moncrief 1 [93]. Apart 
from being interesting in their own right, these metrics provide a good testing ground 
for various a priori estimates one can obtain for general U(l) x U(l) symmetric metrics, 
cf. Chapter 3. 
Throughout this Appendix the letter C denotes a constant the value of which may vary 
from line to line. 
B.l A harmonic map problem. 
Let x( t, B) = (p( t, B),¢( t, 8)) be a map from two-dimensional Minkowski space to a two 
dimensional constant mean curvature hyperoboloid, set 
On the hyperboloid one can introduce coordinates in which the metric takes the form 
1 A similar class of harmonic maps has been considered independently by Shatah and Tahvildar-Zadeh 
in (118]; cf. also [63]. 
94 
The Christoffel symbols are easily calculated to be 
P h h [P _ cosh p [ q,q, = - sin p cos p , q,q, - sinh p , 
so that the Gowdy equations 
where D is the covariant derivative in the target space, Dt = Dx., De = Dx9 , take the 
form 
_! a¢ - 2 coth p ( 8P a¢ - f)p a¢) 
t f)t f)t f)t f)() 80 (B.l.l) 
1 ap . ((a¢)2 (a¢)2) -t f)t + smh p cosh p f)t - f)() . (B.l.2) 
It has been observed by V. Moncrief [93] that the ansatz 
p = p(t) , 1> =nO (B.1.3) 
is compatible with the above equations, which then reduce to a single ordinary differential 
equation for p 
(B.1.4) 
For given 00 the function p(t) should be thought of as an affine parameter on the geodesic 
r = { e = 80 , p ~ 0} u { 0 = 1r + 80 , p ~ 0} on the hyperboloid, rather than a radial 
coordinate constrained to satisfy p ~ 0, so that a change of sign of p means that p( t) has 
crossed the origin along r. The following gives a complete description of the behaviour 
as t-+ 0 of solutions of (B.l.4): 
Proposition B.l.l 1. For To> -oo and for every solution p E C2([T0 ,oo)) of 
(B.1.4) there exist constants 0 :S lvool < 1 and Poo E IR such that 
(B.l.5) 
for all T0 :S T < oo, for some constant C. 
95 
2. For every 0 ~ lvool < 1 and every p00 E lR there exists a solution of (B.1.4} 
satisfying {B.1.5}. If Poo = Voo = 0 then p(r) = 0. 
Proof: 1. Let 
We have 
dg(r) = -n2 cosh2 pe-2,. ' 
dr 
which shows that g is monotonically decreasing, so that g00 = lim,. .... 00 g( T) exists and we 
have 
g(r)=g 00 +n21
00 
cosh2p(s)e- 2"ds ===} 
1~ cosh2 p(s) e- 2"ds < oo. 
For r1 ~ r 2 it follows from (B.1.4) that 
n211,.1 sinh p(s) cosh p(s) e-2• dsl 
7"2 
< n2 1,.1 cosh2 p(s)e- 2"ds, 
7"2 
which together with (B.1.6) implies that lim,. .... 00 ~( T) = V00 exists. 
(B.1.6) 
Let us first assume v00 = 0, then for any t: > 0 there exists r1 such for T > r1 we have 
I~ I < t:, which implies that IPI ~ t:T + C, and (B.1.4) gives 
I ~ pI < C e-2(1-<)T ::::} I dp I < C e-2(1-<)T 
dr2 - 1 dr - 2 ' 
by integration, and one more integration shows that the limit lim,. .... 00 p( T) = Poo exists 
and we have 
for some constants c1 - Cs, which had to be established for Voo = 0. 
If v00 # 0, it follows that ~ has constant sign for T ~ Tt, r1 large enough, so that p 
has constant sign for large enough times, and multiplying p by -1 if necessary we may 
96 
assume that for T > T1 we have p( 7) > 0, and also V 00 > 0. Let us show that V 00 < 1. 
Equation (B.1.4) implies that ~~ is non-increasing, so that if 0 < ~~ ( T0 ) < 1 we are done, 
let us therefore assume that ~~ ( T0 ) > 1. Let T1 :=;; oo be such that for T0 S T < r 1 we 
have* (r) > 1, with* (r1) = 1 if T1 < oo. ForTE fro, T1] we have 
1
T dp p(T)-p(To)= -d (s)ds2:T-T 0 , 
To T 
so that 
which is smaller than 1 for sufficiently large T so that 71 < oo, and our claim follows. 
Define 
r = p(7)- V 00T. 
The function r satisfies lim,._,00 ;'f;: = 0, setting ). = 2(1 - V 00 ) > 0 one obtains 
d2 r n 2 
-, = -- (e2r-.\r- e-2r-2(l+voo)r). 
dT~ 4 (B.L7) 
For r > r1 ( t:), with T1 (.:) > 0 sufficiently large, we have I~~ I :=;; E for any E > 0, therefore 
Jr(r)J :=;; jr(r1(.:))! + ET and for 2t: < A/2 one gets ~:; = O(e-.\r/ 2 ); by integration 
one obtains J~;(r2 )- ;'f;:(r)l = O(e--'r/ 2 ), for r2 > T. Passing with r1 to oo one gets 
;'f;: = 0( e--'rf 2 ), which integrating again yields, for T2 > T 
it ensues in a simple way that there exists a constant Poo such that 
Coming back to the equation (B.l.7) satisfied by r we have in fact 
~~::1 = O(e--'r), 
97 
which gives by a similar argument 
~~~ (r)l + lr(r)- Poo(r)l $ C e-2(1-voo)r' 
so that (B.1.5) follows. 
2. Multiplying p by -1 if necessary we may assume V 00 2: 0. Equations (B.1.4) and 
(B.l.5) are equivalent to the following integral equation for p(r) = p(r)- V 00 T- p00 : 
p(r) = T(p)(r) 
T(p)(r) = _ : 2 ['" (s _ r)(e2p(s)+2Poo _ e-2p(s)+2Poo-4voos) e-As ds , 
with.>.= 2(1-voo)· Let H = {p E C(h,oo)),IIP(r)ll = supr ieAr/ 2p(r)l < oo}. One 
checks without difficulty that there exists r 1 ( V 00 , Poo, n) < oo such that T takes the unit 
ball of H into itself, and that T is a contraction - the claim follows by the contraction 
mapping principle. Finally if V 00 = Pco = 0 then there are no "driving terms" in T so 
that the contraction property implies p = 0. 0 
Let us analyze the behaviour of solutions of (B.l.4) as t -+ oo ( r -+ -oo ): 
Proposition B.1.2 For to> 0 let p E C2 ([to, oo)) be a solution of (B.1.4). 
1. There exists a constant C such that 
(B.l.8) 
2 . . There exist constants eoc, C1 such that 
(B.L9) 
If e= = 0, then p = 0. 
Remark: The proof below suggests very strongly that we have the expansion 
98 
for some constants A, 8 and some functions B;(t) which are polynomials in sin(nt) and 
cos(nt). 
Proof: Define 
'IjJ satisfies the equation 
Let us set 
d'IjJ 'ljJ2 n2t 
e(t) = (dt)2 + 4t2 + 2" (cosh(2p) - 1) 
we have 
de 'ljJ2 
dt = - 2t3 - n2V(p) , 
yep) = psinh(2p) + 1 - cosh(2p) . 
We have YeO) = V'(O) = 0 and V"(p) = 4psinh(2p) ~ 0, thus yep) ~ 0, so that 
which shows that 
de < 0 dt - , 
(~~? ::; c, t (cosh(2rl/2'IjJ) - 1) ::; C 
(B.LlO) 
(B.Lll) 
(B.Ll2) 
(B.Ll3) 
(B.Ll4) 
for some constant C. The inequality cosh(2p) - 1 ~ 2p2 and the second inequality in 
(B.lo14) give 
(B.Ll5) 
and (B.lo8) follows. Taylor expanding coshp to fourth order in (B.l.1l) and making use 
of (B.l.15) one obtains 
(B.Ll6) 
From (B.l.13) it follows that e is monotone, therefore the limit eoo = limt_oo e(t) exists. 
There exists a constant Cv such that for p ::; 1 we have !Y(p) I ::; Cvp\ and since 
p tends to zero as t goes to infinity there exists a T such that for t > T we have 
!Y(p) I ::; Cv'IjJ4r2 ::; c'r2, and integrating (B.Ll2) one obtains 
(B.Ll7) 
so that (B.l.l6) leads to 
a simple calculation gives 
which proves (B.l.9). Suppose finally that e00 = 0. The inequality (B.1.17) together 
with eoo = 0 implies 
(B.l.18) 
Inserting (B.1.18) into (B.1.12) and repeating iteratively the above argument one shows 
that for any f E IN there exists C(f) such that 
11/J(t)l + e(t) :5 C(f) rt . 
The inequalities (B.l.l9) with f = 2 and V(p) :5 Cvp4 give 
which implies 
n2V( ) < C n2 4 = Cvn2?jJ4 < Cvn2C(2)2 ?j,12 < ?j,12 
p - v p t2 - t3 t3 - 2t3 
( ) e(h)t~ e t2 :5 -t-4 - , 
2 
{B.l.19) 
passing with t3 to infinity one obtains e(t) = 0, 1/J = p = 0, which had to be established. 
D 
100 
B.2 Moncrief's space-times. 
Let M = { t E (0, oo ), 8, xa E [0, 27r]!mod2rr, a= 1, 2}. Consider the following Gowdy-type 
metrics 
(B.2.1) 
+ (cosh p - cos </; sinh p) ( dx 2? , 
p=p(t,O), </;=</;(t,8), 
where_\ and ga are real constants, ,\ > 0. For a metric of the form (B.2.1) the dynamical 
part of Einstein equations reduces to the equations (B.l.l)-(B.l.2), and assuming Mon­
crief's ansatz (B.1.3) one finds that B = B(t) (cf. e.g. eqs. (2.30) and (2.33) of [32]; the 
constants Ca appearing in these equations vanish for the metrics (B.2.1)), and 
dB 1 t [ dp 2 2 . 2 J - = -- + - (-) + n smh p . dt 4t 4 dt (B.2.2) 
In this way we obtain a family of metrics parametrized by six parameters - .>., ga, 
a = 1, 2, an integration constant Bo forB and two real constants parametrizing solutions 
of the equation (B.1.4), e.g. V 00 and Poo given by Proposition B.l.l. (Out of these 
parameters of course only V 00 and Poo are dynamically interesting.) We shall refer to 
these space-times as Moncrief's space-times. 
Proposition B.2.1 All Moncrief's space-times are .future causally geodesically com­
plete. 
Proof: If the constant e00 given by Proposition B.l.2 vanishes ( =? p = 0, cf. Proposition 
B.l.2) one easily checks that the metric can be put in Kasner's form with exponents 
(p1,p2, p3) = (~, ~'-~)or permutation thereof ( cf. Section 2.4 for a description of Kasner 
metrics), in which ca.se it is easy to show future geodesic completeness, we shall thus 
consider the case eoo #- 0 only. Let f( s) = { x~'( s)} be a future inextendible future 
101 
directed affinely parametrized causal geodesic. From 'Y11-v d;: d;: = -.::, .:: E {0, 1 }, and 
from 
dpa d ( dx~-' ") 
ds = ds AIJ.<v ds X" . = 0 ' 
where x: a~v are the Killing vectors a~a, a = 1, 2, one obtains the following equations, 
d~ aM a a ~ - = -g - + P · P =: g Pb , ds ds ' 
where gab = (Yab)-1 , 9ab = >.tnab· The t part of the equations satisfied by a geodesic 
reads 
:!_(B2dt) _ B2 -2B[( -ab )dB_~ Ogab a b] ds ds - e t: + g PaPb dt 2 ot p p . (B.2.3) 
Non-spacelikeness of r implies that r can be parametrized by t, which allows us to 
rewrite (B.2.3) as 
~ (B4(::)2) = f, 
4 28 b dB 1 fJgab b 
f =: 2B e- [(.:: + ga PaPb) dt - 27ftPaP] · 
From (B.2.2) and Proposition B.l.2, point 2, we have 
dB _ e00 O( _1 ) 
---+ t dt 4 
eoo 
B = 4 t + O(ln t) , 
(B.2.4) 
(B.2.5) 
which together with (B.1.8) shows that f converges exponentially fast to zero as t goes 
to infinity, therefore there exists a constant C such that 
which for t large enough gives 
(. dt ) 2 ( 8 \4 
f 1 - :$ -) c, ds eoo, 
and for s2 2: s1 one obtains 
so that s2 -+ oo as t(s 2)-+ oo, which had to be established. 0 
102 
Proposition B.2.2 Let r be either a past inextendible timelike curve parametrized by 
pT'Oper time, or an affinely parametrized past inextendible null geodesic, in a Moncrief's 
space-time. Then 
1. r reaches the boundary t = 0 in finite proper time or finite affine time, say so, and 
2. we have 
Proof; From (B.2.2) and from Proposition RLI it follows that there exists a constant 
Bo such tha.t 
(B.2.6) 
Consider first a timelike curve r = {xJL(s)} parametrized by proper time s, with t(s) 
decreasing as s increases, 
2B[(dt)2 (dB)2] \ (dx a a.dO) (dXb b dO ) e - - - - Atna.b - + 9 - - + 9 - = 1. ds ds ds ds ds ds 
Equation (B.2.7) implies 
Bat e - <-1 ds -
(B.2.7) 
(recall that r is pa.st-directed) which together with (R2.6) gives, for S2 ;:::: 81, with t(sd 
- small enough, 
so that any timelike curve reaches t = 0 in finite proper time. To prove the result for 
null geodesics, some more work is required. In what follows we shall write that 
if 
f lim::-' = 1 . 
t-+O 9 
103 
From (B.2.2) and from Proposition B.1.1 we have 
dB () ~ v!, -1 
dt t 4t ' 
v2 -1 
B(t)~~lnt, 
ds2 ~ e2Bo t(v~-1)/2 (-dt2 + dtP) + >.tl-ivool{ 1 +cos( nO) (dx1 + ld0)2 
. 2 
(B.2.8) 
. 1- cos( nO) + sm(nO)(dx1 + ldO)(dx 2 + ldO) + 2 (dx2 + ld0) 2} , (B.2.9) 
09ab - o(>.tnab) 1-lvool 8t = ot ~ t 9ab , (B.2.10) 
with (B.2.9) holding for lvool > 0, and (B.2.8), (B.2.10) holding for 0 < lvool < 1. 
Consider null geodesics such that (p1 ) 2 + (p2 ) 2 -:f. 0; the case p1 = p2 = 0 is analyzed 
by a similar simpler argument. From (B.2.4)-(B.2.5) and (B.2.10) one obtains t small 
enough, 
so that B4(f) 2 increases as t(s) goes to zero for t(s 1) ::::; t 1 , for some h small enough, 
therefore for s ;::: s1 
B4 (dt)2 > C ds - ' 
and an argument similar to the one for timelike curves shows that r must reach t = 0 in 
finite affine time. 
To analyze the behaviour of the curvature near t = 0, with the help of a SHEEP 
calculation 2 one finds 
and (B.2.6) gives 
(B.2.11) 
for some constant C, so that the curvature blows up uniformly along all curves as t 
approaches zero. 0 
From Propositions B.2.1, B.2.2, and C.2.4 one obtains 
2The author is grateful to D. Singleton for performing this calculation. 
104 
Theorem B.2.1 Let I: = T 3 , let X(L:) be the space of Cauchy data for Moncrief's 
metrics. The Theorem-To-Be-Proved holds in X(L:), with Y(L:) = X(L:); more precisely, 
every maximal Hausdorff developement of a Cauchy data set for a Moncrief metric is 
globally hyperbolic, therefore unique, and inextendible, in vacuum or otherwise, in the 
class of Hausdorff Lorentzian manifolds with Cl;;~ metrics. 
105 
Appendix C 
Maximal developments. 
In this Appendix we shall discuss the existence of maximal developments, and we shall 
also prove some criteria which allow one to decide whether or not a given development 
is maximal. 
C.l Existence of maximal space-times. 
In this section we shall prove the existence of maximal space~times; the reader should 
note that we are not making any global hyperbolicity hypotheses. The arguments here 
follow essentially those of [21]. Throughout this section "W manifold" stands for a 
connected, paracompact, Hausdorff n~dimensional manifold of differentiability class W 
such that W C C 1, where W stands for e.g. Ck,Oi or some Sobolev class, etc. The 
manifold will be said Lorentzian if it is equipped vvith a metric tensor, perhaps defined 
only almost everywhere, of a differentiability class adapted to that of W. For example, 
if W = Ck,cx then we should have k 2 1 and the metric, defined everywhere, will be 
of ck-l,OI differentiability class. It is useful to keep in mind that w can be a rather 
complicated space, e.g. for the purpose of the Cauchy problem in general relativity an 
appropriate space W is the set of maps which preserve the condition that the components 
of the metric tensor /'"v restricted to the hypersurfaces E = { t = const} are of Sobolev 
class HfoJI:;), the time~derivatives of /'"v are in Ht1 (E), etc. A W Lorentzian manifold 
106 
will be called vacuum if W is such that the equations RJ.Lv = 0 can be defined, perhaps 
in a distributional sense, and if RJ.Lv = 0 holds. 
Theorem C.Ll Let (Af,{) be a W Lorentzian manifold, there exists a W Lorentzian 
manifold ( M, i') and an isometric embedding <!> : M ---+ M such that M is inextendible 
in the class of W Lonmtzian manifolds. The same is true if "Lorentzian W manifold" is 
replaced by "vacuum Lorentzian W manifold" everywhere above. 
Remarks: 
1. The C1 differentiability threshold for M cannot be weakened in the proof below. 
The author ignores whether or not the C 1 differentiability of M is necessary. 
2. The maximal manifolds (M,i') need not be unique, and may depend upon W. A 
non-trivial example of tV dependence, with W = Ck,Oi, is given by some Robinson­
Trautman (RT) space-times, which for k + a :2: 123 admit no non-trivial future 
extensions, while for k + a < 118 they admit an infinite number of non-isometric 
vacuum RT extensions. 
Proof: For £ :2: n let Ae denote the set 1 of subsets of IRe which are n-dimensional 
manifolds, set Aoo = U~ 0 Ae. By a famous theorem of Whitney [128] every ( C 1 , con­
nected, paracompact, Hausdorff) manifold can be embedded in JR" for some f, which 
shows that every manifold has a representative which is an element of Aco; it follows that 
without loss of generality a manifold can be defined as an element of Aco; and we shall 
do so. With this definition the collection of all manifolds is Aoo, and therefore is a set. 
It follows from the axioms of set theory that the collection of all C1 manifolds which 
are W manifolds forms a set; the same is true of the collection Mw of W Lorentzian 
manifolds (recall that a Lorentzian manifold can be identified with a subset of the bun­
dle T2IVI, where T2 M is the bundle of 2-covariant tensors on I\1), and of the collection 
},;( w, vac of W vacuum Lorentzian manifolds. Let ( M, 1) be a Lorentzian, respectively 
1 cf e.g. [78][Appendix] for an overview of axiomatic set theory. 
107 
a vacuum Lorentzian, W manifold, consider the subset Mw(M,I) of Mw, respectively 
M w, vac( M, 1) of M w, vac, defined as the set of those Lorentzian manifolds ( M ~ 7) for 
which there exists an isometric C1 embedding~ : M-+ M. On both Mw(M,I) and 
Mw,vac(M,I) we can define a partial order-< as follows: (M,7)-< (M1,7I) if there ex­
ists an isometric C1 embedding~: M-+ M1. If A C Mw(M,I) or A C Mw,vac(M,I) 
is a chain, define M = (u(M,.:Y)EA.M) /"',where for p EM and q E M1, we set p"' q iff 
q = ~(p), where~: M-+ M1 is an isometric C1 embedding. It is not too difficult to show 
that M is a W manifold (Hausdorff, paracompact, connected), a Lorentzian metric ;y can 
be defined on M in an obvious way. Since every element ( M, 7) of A can be embedded 
in M (M 3 p-+ [p]~ E M), it follows that M is an upper bound for A. Zorn's Lemma 
(cf. e.g. [78]) shows that both Mw(M,I) and Mw,vac(M,I) have maximal elements, 
which had to be established. 0 
C.2 Some maximality criteria. 
In this Appendix we will discuss some inextendability criteria. Let us start with some 
terminology. Recall that we have defined ( M, 7) to be an extension of ( M, 1) if there 
exists an isometric embedding~ of Minto M, and M f. M. We shall often identify M 
with ~(M). If M is a subset of M, by aM we always mean the topological boundary of 
Min M: aM= {p EM\ M such that :lp; EM with the property that Pi-+ p}. When 
considering inextendability criteria, it is useful to keep in mind the possibility of allowing 
extensions in which a weak form of violation of Hausdorffness occurs. Following Clarke 
[40] we shall say that a (possibly2 non-Hausdorff) space-time is a Hajicek space-time if 
there exists no bifurcating causal curves in (M,1) (more precisely, let r"': [O,b)-+ M, 
a= 1,2 be two continuous causal curves such that f 1i[O,a) = f 2 i[O,a) for some a< b, 
then r 1 (a) = r 2 (a). In this section all geodesics are affinely parametrized; unless specified 
otherwise we do not impose any particular orientation on the affine parameter. In all the 
results presented in this section we make essential use of both existence and uniqueness 
2If M is Hausdorff, then the Hajicek condition trivially holds. 
108 
of solutions of the initial value problem for geodesics; those are guaranteed by cl~; 
differentiability of the metric and by the requirement that the space-times considered 
satisfy the Hajicek condition. The results here need not to hold in an arbitrary non­
Hausdorff space-time, or in space-times with metrics the derivatives of which are not 
Lipschitz continuous. 
Let us recall a criterion which has been used by Misner and Taub (85] to prove inextend­
ability of the Taub-NUT space-time: 
Proposition C.2.1 Let (M, !) be a Hausdorff space-time with a C1~; met7·ic, suppose 
that for every geodesic segment f : [so, s1 ) --7 M which cannot be extended beyond s1 
there exists a compact set I< such that f c I<. Then ( M, 1) is inextendible in the class 
of Hausdorff space--times with C1~; metrics. 
Remark: It should be noted that in Tanb-NUT space-time there exist inextendible 
geodesic segments which remain in a compact set. 
Proof: Suppose that (it,:Y) is an extension of (M,1). For any p E oM there exist 
some geodesic segment fp: [O,a]-+ M such that fp(O) = p, fp(a) EM (fp- timelike, 
spacelike or null). Since p rf_ M, it follows that r P n M is inextendible in M and is not 
contained in any compact set K, which leads to a contradiction. 0 
In exactly the same way one proves: 
Proposition C.2.2 Let (M,1) be a Hajicekspace-time with a C1~: metric, suppose that 
for every geodesic segment r : [so, si} -+ M which cannot be extended beyond s1 eithe1· 
1. there exists a compact set J{ such that r C K, or 
2. some polynomial scalar of the curvature tensor is unbounded on f as s --7 s1 • 
Then (M, 1) is inextendible in the class of Hajicek space-times with C1~; metrics. 
109 
Note that if 1 and ;y are assumed to he twice differentiable, then point 2 above can be 
weakened to "some polynomial scalar of the curvature tensor has no finite limit on r as 
s ~ s1 " (in other words, if the limit exists, it is infinite). 
If we have an extension of ( M, 1) and a point p E oM such that there exists a timelike 
curve from M to p, it is easily seen that there necessarily exists a timelike geodesic from 
M top. Whenever (M,1) is time-orientable 1 it is natural to divide extensions in the 
following classes: 
1. there exists a future directed timelike geodesic from M to M, 
2. there exists a past directed timelike geodesic from M to M, 
3. there exist both future and past time directed timelike geodesics from ]1,{ to M, 
4. there exists no timelike geodesics from M to M. 
Let us show that case 4 above cannot occur: 
Proposition C.2.3 Let (M,1) be a Hajicek space-time with a Cl;; metric, suppose that 
( jf{, :Y) is a Hajicek extension thereof with a C1~; metric. Then there necessarily exists 
1. a timelike geodesic M to aM, and 
2. a null geodesic from M to oM. 
Proof: Suppose there exists p E oM such that there exists no timelike geodesic from 
M top, thus I(p) n M = 0, where I(p) is the union of the future and of the past of p 
in M. There exists a sequence Pi E M such that p; --+ p, choose any normal geodesic 
neighbourhood 0 C Jtf of p with a local coordinate chart, for i large enough we have 
Pi E 0. It is easily seen that fori large enough a maximally extended geodesic through Pi 
with tangent vector 8/ at at p must leave M and enter M, and the result follows because 
in a Hajicek space-time there exists no bifurcate timelike geodesics. The result for null 
geodesics is proved in a similar way. 0 
llO 
We shall say that a time-orientable space-time ( M, 1) is future inextendible if there 
exists no extension ( M, i') of ( M, 1) in which a future directed causal curve starting in 
M enters M; the notion of past inextendibility is defined similarly. Proposition C.2.3 
shows that a space-time which is both future and past inextendible is inextendible. This 
is a useful result, because together with Proposition C.2.2 it reduces the task of proving 
inextendability of M to an analysis of the behaviour of either null or timelike geodesics 
in (M,1): 
Proposition C.2A 1. In Propositions C.2.1 and C.2.2 "every geodesic segment" can 
be replaced by "every tirnelike geodesic segment". 
2. In Propositions C.2.1 and C.2.2 "every geodesic segment" can be replaced by "every 
null geodesic segment". 
Given a globally hyperbolic space-time ( M, 1), it might be useful in some situations 
to be able to determine whether (M, 1) is maximal in the class of globally hyperbolic 
space-times (note that this does not exclude the existence of non-globally-hyperbolic 
extensions of (M, 1)). We shall say that a globally hyperbolic Lorentzian manifold (M, 1) 
admits a crushing future boundar·y if there exists a foliation of ( M, 1) by spacelike Cauchy 
hypersurfaces :Er, T E ( T 0 , T1), -oo :=; T 0 < T1 :=; oo, such that 
where 
gij is the inverse of the metric 9ii induced by 1 on :En and J{i.i is the extrinsic curvature 
of :Er. Similarly a crushing past boundary is defined by the condition 
(Eardley and Smarr [43} have proposed the term "crushing singularity" for the above 
described behaviour: we find that terminology misleading, because the existence of a 
crushing boundary does not imply existence of a singularity in the geometry 3 , there 
might exist perfectly smooth extensions of ( M, 1) as is seen e.g. in some polarized Gowdy 
metrics [37].) Although it is irrelevant for further purposes, it might be of some interest 
to note that in spatially compact space-times (M, 1) with crushing boundaries there 
exist constant mean curvature (CMC) surfaces [7]; if moreover the timelike convergence 
condition holds (Rp,vX~' X" ~ 0 for all timelike vectors X), then (M, 1) can be foliated 
by CMC surfaces. 
As has been noted by Moncrief [87], the existence of crushing boundaries implies maxi­
mality in the class of globally hyperbolic space-times: 
Proposition C.2.5 Let (M, 1) be a globally hyperbolic, spatially compact, Hajicek space­
time with a cl~: metric. 
1. Suppose that ( M, 1) has a future crushing boundary. Then ( M, 1) is future inex­
tendible in the class of globally hyperbolic, Hajicek space-times with C1~: metrics. 
2. The same is true if "future" is replaced by "past" everywhere above. 
Proof: Let Er, To < T < r1 be a foliation of ( M, 1) as in the definition of future crushing 
boundary, suppose that Uf1, :Y) is a future extension of ( M, 1), let p E M \ M be such 
that M n I-(p; i:f) i- 0, where I-(p; M) is the past of pin M. By global hyperbolicity 
of ( M, :Y) for any r < r1 there exists a future directed maximizing timelike geodesic 
f 7 : [O,s1(r)]-+ l'd parametrized by proper time such that fr(O) E En f 7 (s1(r)) = p, 
for some s1 ( T) > 0, where throughout this proof "maximizing" stands for "maximizing 
in the class of geodesics which start on 2::7 and have p as endpoint" . Choose some 
To < f < T}j there exists 3 < sl(r) such that rf(s) E aM. Since the Er's are Cauchy 
surfaces it follows that for T > T we have Ern r f i- 0, and since the r T 's are maximizing 
geodesics from Er to p it follows that s1 ( T) ~ s1 ( T) - s > 0. But by [66][Corollary, 
3If the space-time is spatially compact and the timelike convergence condition holds (RI'vXI' xv 2: 0 
for all timelike vectors X) (M, 1) will b~, however, geodesically incomplete, cf. e.g. [66)[Chapter 8, 
Theorem 4]. 
112 
Section 6. 7] and [66] [Proposition 4A.3) there are no future directed maximizing geodesics 
of length more then 3/ Kf starting at :En which gives a contradiction since 3/ Kf -+ 0 
~rMs-+~. o 
113 
Appendix D 
Some flat metrics with Cauchy 
horizons .. 
In this Appendix we present a family of flat n + 1 dimensional space-times which have 
at least two non-isometric extensions across a smooth Cauchy horizon; this example is a 
generalization of Misner's model for the Taub-NUT space-times [84]. The space-times 
considered here do not have compact spa.celike hypersurfaces, as opposed to Misner's 
example which, in n+l dimensions, can be given 1R X S1 X rn-l topology, where re 
is an £ dimensional torus. In view of the renewed interest in flat Lorentzian manifolds 
[130] [92] [83] it would be useful to understand the global structure of all flat Lorentzian 
manifolds, at least in 4 dimensions. 
For n ?: 2 let ( t, x, y ), y = y1 if n = 2 or y = (y 1, .. . , yn-I) otherwise, be coordinates in 
n + 1 dimensional Minkowski space, 
(D.O.l) 
with dy2 = ( dy1 ) 2 if n = 2 and dy2 = djj2 = ( dy1 ) 2 + ... + ( dyn-l )2 otherwise. Let A0 be 
a fixed Lorentz boost in the t - x plane, 
/o /of3 0 
Ao = /of3 /o 0 
0 0 idRn-1 
114 
1 I .Sol < 1, 'Yo = r;--;;;i, ' y1- .85 
where idR.n-1 is the identity matrix in IR"- 1. Let 1{r denote a hyperboloid in JR"+l, 
'1.J { 2 2 -2} tt-r= r=t -x -y , 
with 1i0 - the light cone at the origin. Define MAo as the quotient of the interior J+(o) 
of the solid future light cone J+(o) from the origin by the group generated by A0 . In 
J+(O) we can introduce coordinates ( r, ,8, ,81) as follows: 
y=sh,81 ifn=2, iJ=sh,81w, wESn- 1 (1) ifn>2, 
(D.0.2) 
(D.0.3) 
where Sk(1) is the k-dimensional unit sphere. In terms of (D.0.2) the metric (D.0.1) 
takes the form 
(D.0.4) 
and a term sh2 ,81 dw 2 has to be added to (D.0.4) if n > 2. One finds 
(D.0.5) 
h~8 -the round metric on an- 1 dimensional sphere ( det h~8 = 1 if n = 2). Equation 
(D.0.4) and the definition of MAo show that ( r, ,8, ,81) can be used as coordinates on 
MAo if ,8 is identified with ,8 + ,80 . By (D.0.5) it follows that (D.0.4) gives an analytic 
extension of the flat metric on MAo to the larger manifold M, 
r E (-oo,oo), ,81 E (-oo,oo) for n = 2, sinh,81 w E JRn-1 for n > 2, (D.0.6) 
,8 E [0, .Bo] lmod;30 • 
115 
Another extension (M, i') is obtained by defining coordinates ( r, ~' f3t), with ;9 E [0, f3ollmod.Bo 
and r, (31 - as in (D.0.6), by 
- (r- l)eS 
t = ch(31 ch(3 + h(3 , 2c 1 
- (r- l)eS 
x = ch(31sh(3 + h(3 , 2c 1 
(D.0.7) 
y as in (D.0.3), which yields 
(D.0.8) 
(D.0.9) 
d - ch2 (31 h2(n-2) (3 d ho etiJLv = --4- S 1 et AB. 
There exists an isometry q> : {p E M: r(p) > 0} --t M, where q> is obtained by calculating 
(r,;9,{31 ) as a function of (r,{3,{31 ) from (D.0.2) and (D.0.7). From the equation 
- e.8ch2(31 e.B- --:-'::-':­
- T + sh2(31 ' 
it follows that ;9 blows up at r = (31 = 0, thus q> cannot be extended beyond r = 0. It 
should be noted that the map W :, M --t M defined by 
is a globally defined isometry, thus ( M, I) and ( M' i') are isometric. ( M, I) and ( M' i') 
are, however, inequivalent space-times from a Cauchy problem point of view for the 
following reason: let i : ~ --t M, i : f: --t M be em beddings such that M and M are 
developments of the Cauchy data set(~, g, K), then there exists no isometry 3 : M --t M 
such that 3 o i = i ( cf. [36]). 
It should be noted that the space-times described above, restricted to the t-x plane, 
coincide with the so-called "Misner model" for the Taub-NUT space-time. 
116 
Appendix E 
On a wave equation with a singular 
source. 
In this Appendix we shall show that the solutions of the problem (1.8.3)-(1.8.4), with 
0 (j. supp J, f E C00 (JR), cp, '1/J E C00 (JR2), are smooth on lR3 \supp p. Consider thus the 
equation 
DU=f(t)So, 
recall that 
~ lnr = 27rDo, 
where ~ = ::. + lfr, and we also have 
0 < a E lR, ~ r" ln r = a( a ln r + 2) r"'- 2 • 
From (E.O.l) one finds that the function U1 = U- f(t) ln r/27r satisfies 
1 /)2 f oul = ---lnr 27r ot2 ' 
(E.O.l) 
(E.0.2) 
and using (E.0.2) one shows by induction that there exist functions cp; E C00 (JR), 0 (j. 
supp cp;, such that for any k E IN we have 
DUk - D (u- ~ cp;(t)r 2; lnr) 
= n(t)r 2k ln~ + '1/Jk =: Pk, 
117 
for some functions Xk E C00 (JR), '1/Jk E C00 (JR3 ). For any£ E IN we can find k such that 
Pk E Ht+2(JR3 ); we also have Uklt=O = Ult=O, thus the Cauchy data for uk are smooth, 
and by standard theory Uk E Ht~2 {JR3) C Ct(JR3). This shows that for any£ we have 
U E Ct(JR3\supp p), thus U E C00 {1R3 \supp p), which had to be established. Let us 
note that the argument presented above provides also an asymptotic expansion for Up 
in a neighbourhood of supp p, which can be used to analyze in detail the nature of the 
singularities occuring in (Mp, /p)· 
118 
Appendix F 
Bifurcating geodesics 
0 < a< 1, metrics@ 
in cl,a loc' 
In this Appendix we present C1~;, 0 < a < 1, metrics for which there exist bifurcat­
ing spacelike, timelike or null geodesics. From the classical theory of ODE's it is well 
known that the initial value problem (IVP) for the geodesic equation is uniquely solvable 
when the metric is C1~;. Due to the variational character of the geodesic equations one 
could hope, at least in the strictly Riemannian case, to have uniqueness of the IVP for 
geodesics under some weaker conditions: the examples of this Appendix show that the 
requirement of c[;; differentiability of the metric cannot be relaxed without introducing 
some supplementary conditions. The examples presented here have been worked out in 
collaboration with J.Isenberg, following a suggestion by R.Hamilton 1 . 
Let us start by noting that if we have a metric which is C1~; except possibly at an isolated 
point X 0 in a neighborhood of which 
(F.O.l) 
uniqueness of the initial value problem for geodesics can be established by standard fixed 
point methods in an appropriately weighted space of functions (recall that existence 
1It has been pointed out to the author by R. Bartnik, that essentially the same example has been 
presented in [65] for spacelike geodesics in a Riemannian metric. 
119 
follows from the classical theorem of Peano [82] which asserts that continuity of the right 
hand side of the equation 
dx 
dt = f(x,t) 
is sufficient for existence of solutions; it is only the uniqueness part which necessitates 
the Lipschitz continuity of f in x). Thus it seems that for nonuniqueness of the IVP 
for geodesics the set at which the metric is not cl~~ "must have dimension greater than 
zero". For non-unique spacelike or timelike geodesics we show that a singular set of 
dimension 1 is sufficient, for null geodesics dimension 2 is sufficient and probably also 
necessary; we have undertaken no attempts to prove this last conjecture. 
For y E lR and for Eixil+<> > -1/2 consider the metric 
f = ±1, 0 < 0: < 1. (F.0.2) 
The equations for a geodesic are easily found from the constants of motion, 
f( ) dy ( ddxs )2 + f(x) ( ddys )2 = c. x ds = py = canst, ... (F.0.3) 
Let X 0 > 0, consider the geodesic which at s = 0 passes through ( X 0 , Yo) with ( dx / ds )(0) < 
O,py = 1; from (F.0.3) we have 
dx 
ds 
lxl(l+a)/2 
For s such that x( s) > 0 x monotonically decreases, which gives 
thus x( s) reaches 0 in finite time, say S 0 • (F .0.4) implies that 
i20 
(F.0.4) 
(F.0.5) 
For any s 1 :2:: s0 we can extend the above geodesic to two different C1 geodesics as follows: 
for s E (so, s1] set 
x(s) = 0, y(s) = s 
and for s 1 S s S s1 + S 0 set either 
x(s) = x(s1- s +so), 
or 
x(s) = -x(s1- s +so). 
This establishes non-uniqueness of the initial value problem. Uniqueness of the boundary 
value problem for geodesics for C11;: metrics remains an open question 2 • Higher dimen­
sional metrics with bifurcating geodesics can be trivially obtained from (F.0.2) by adding 
terms dzi + dz~ + · · · + dz~ to (F.0.2). 
Let us finally exhibit a metric on a three dimensional Lorentzian manifold with bifurcating 
null geodesics. For lxl < 1, y, z E 1R let 
a(x) = 1- jxll+"' /2, b(x) = 1 + lxl1+"' /2, 0 < o: < 1. (F.0.6) 
Arguments similar to the ones presented above show that the null geodesics satisfying 
dy 
a(x) ds = 1, 
dz 
b(x) ds = 1, 
dx 
ds 
lxl(l+a)/2 
(a( X )b( X) )1/2 ' 
x(O) = X 0 > 0, 
can be C 1 continued in a non-unique way at a finite value s0 of the affine parameter, at 
which they reach the plane x = 0. 
2 Let us recall that e.g. one has uniqueness of the boundary value problem for causal geodesics 
in a Lorentzian manifold for metrics which are not C11~; but for which the curvature tensor, defined 
distributionally, is locally bounded, cf. [41]. 
121 
Bibliography 
[1] S.Agmon, A.Douglis, L.Nirenberg, Commun.Pure Appl.Math. 12, 623 (1959). 
[2] L.Andersson, P.T.Chrusciel, On the Asymptotic Behaviour of Solutions of the Con­
straint Equations in General Relativity with Hyperboloidal Boundary Conditions, in 
preparation. 
[3] L.Andersson, P.T.Chrusciel, H.Friedrich On the Regularity of Solutions of the Yam­
abe Equation and the Existence of Smooth Hyperboloidal Initial data for Einstein's 
Field Eqtwtions, MPA preprint, 1991. 
[4] A.Ashtekar, R.O.Hansen, J.Math.Phys. 19, 1542 (1978). 
[5] R.Bartnik, Commun.Pure Appl.Math. 39, 661 (1986). 
[6] R.Bartnik, Some Open Problems in Mathematical Relativity, Proceedings of Confer­
ence on Mathematical Relativity, ANU, July 1988, R.Bartnik, ed., Canberra 1989. 
[7] R.Bartnik, Coinmun.Math.Phys. 94, 155 (1984); Acta Math. 161, 145 (1988). 
[8] R.Bar~nik, Quasi-Spherical Metrics with prescribed scalar curvature, CMA ANU 
Research Report, 1990. 
[9] R.Beig, N.O'Murchadha, Phys.Rev.Lett. 66, 2421 (1991). 
[10] B.K.Berger, Class.Quantum Grav. 7, 203 (1990). 
[11] J.Bibik, B.Schmidt, Phys.Rev. D40, 1827 (1989). 
122 
[12] O.I.Bogoyavlensky, Methods in the Qualitative Theory of Dynamical Systems in As­
trophysics and Gas Dynamics, Springer, New York 1985. 
[13] W.B.Bonnor, Phys.Lett. 31A, 269 (1970). 
[14] R.Budic, J.Isenberg, L.Lindblom, P.Yasskin, Commun.Math.Phys. 6l, 87 (1978). 
[15] A.B.Burd, N.Buric, G.F.R.Ellis, Gen.Rel.Grav. 18, 1263 (1990). 
[16} J.Cameron, in preparation. 
[17] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, Ann.Inst.Henri Poincare 8, 327 (1968). 
[18] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, Ann.Inst.Henri Poincare 46, 1 (1987). 
[19] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, D.Christodoulou, Acta Math. 145 129 (1981). 
[20] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, D.Christodoulou, M.Francaviglia, Ann.Inst.Henri Poincare 29, 
241 (1978). 
[21] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, R.Geroch, Commun.Math.Phys. 14, 329 (1969). 
[22] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, M.Novello, C.R.Acad.Sci. Paris 205, 155 (1987). 
[23] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, C.de Witt, Analysis, Manifolds and Physics, Vol. II, pp. 249-
256, North Holland, Amsterdam 1989. 
[24] Y.Choquet-Bruhat, J.York, The Cauchy Problem, in General Relativity and Gravi­
tation, A.Held, ed., Plenum, New York 1980. 
[25] D.Christodoulou, Commun.Math.Phys. 93, 171 (1984). 
[26] D.Christodoulou, Commun.Math.Phys. 105, 337 (1986); 106, 587 (1986); 109, 591 
(1987); 109, 613 (1987); Commun.Pure and Appl.Math. 44, 339 (1991); in prepa­
ration. 
123 
[27) D.Christodoulou, On the Nature of the Singularities of General Relativity, preprint, 
199L 
[28] D.Christodoulou, private communication, 
[29] D.Christodoulou, S.Klainerman, Ann,of Math., in press. 
[30] D.Christodoulou, S.Klainerman, in preparation. 
[31] P.T.Chrusciel, Commun.Math.Phys. 120, 233 (1988). 
[32] P.T.Chrusciel, Ann.of Physics 202, 100 (1990). 
[33] P.T.Chrusciel, Commun, Math.Phys. 137, 289 (1991). 
[34] P.T.Chrusciel, On the Global Structure of Robinson-Trautman Space-Times, CMA 
ANU Research Report CMA-R23-90. 
[35] P.'LChrusciel On the Isenberg-Moncrief "Cauchy Data at the Singularity" Descrip­
tion of the Polarized Gowdy Space-Times, in preparation, 
[36) P.T.Chrusciel, JJsenberg, Non-isometric Extensions of Maximal Globally Hyperb.olic 
Space- Times, in preparation. 
[37] P.T.Chrusciel, J.Isenberg, V.Moncrief, Class, Quantum Grav. 7, 1671 (1990). 
[38] P.T.Chrusciel, \!.Moncrief, unpublished. 
[39] P.'T.Chrusciel, D.Singleton, Non-Smoothness of the Event Horizon in Robinson­
Trautman Space-times, CMA ANU Research Report CMA-MR15-91 (1991). 
[40] C.J.S.Cla.rke, Commun.Math.Phys, 49, 17 (1976). 
[41] C.J.S.Clarke, J.Ma.th.Anal.AppL 88, 270 (1982). 
(42] M.Demianski, J.P.Lasota, Astrophys.Lett. 1, 205 (1968). 
[43] D.Eardley, LSmarr, Phys.Rev. Dl9, 2239 (1979). 
124 
(44] F.J.Ernst, !.Hauser, J.Math.Phys. 30, 872 (1989). 
(45] A.Fischer, The Theory of Superspace, in Relativity: Proceedings of the Relativity 
Conference in the Midwest, M.Carmeli, S.I.Fickler, L.Witten, eds., Plenum, New 
York 1970. 
[46) A.Fischer, J.Marsden, Commun.Math.Phys. 28, 1 (1972). 
[47) A.Fischer, J.Marsden, V.Moncrief, Ann.Inst.H.Poincare 33, 147 (1980). 
(48] J.Foster, Proc.Camb.Phil.Soc. 66, 521 (1969). 
(49] Y.Foures-Bruhat, Acta Math. 88, 141 (1952). 
[50) J. Friedman, M.S. Morris, I. Novikov, F. Echeverria, R. Glinkhammer, K. S. Thorne, 
U. Yurtsever, Cauchy problem in space-times with closed timelike curves, Phys. Rev. 
D42 (1990), 1915-1930. 
(51] H.Friedrich, Commun.Math.Phys. 91, 445 (1983). 
[52] H.Friedrich, Commun.Math.Phys. 107, 587 (1987). 
[53) H.Friedrich, On the global existence and the asymptotic behaviour of solutions ot the 
Einstein-Maxwell- Yang-Mills equations, preprint MPA 402 (1988), J.Diff.Geom. (in 
press). 
[54) H.Friedrich, B.Schmidt, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A 414, 171 (1987). 
[55] G.Galloway, Space-Time Splitting Theorems, Proceedings of Conference on Mathe­
matical Relativity, ANU, July 1988, R.Bartnik, ed., Canberra 1989. 
[56] R.Geroch, J.Math.Phys. 8, 782 (1970). 
[57) R.Geroch, J.Math.Phys. 11, 437 (1970). 
[58) R.Geroch, J.Math.Phys. 13, 394 (1972). 
125 
[59) R.Geroch, in Asymptotic Structure of Space-Time, F.P.Esposito, L.Witten, eds., 
Plenum, New York 1977. 
[60) R.Geroch, J. Traschen, Phys.Rev. 036, 1017 {1987). 
[61) R.Gowdy, Phys.Rev.Lett 27, 826 (1971). 
[62] R.Gowdy, Ann.Phys. 83, 203 (1974). 
[63] M.Grillakis, in preparation. 
[64) P.Hajicek, J.Math.Phys. 12, 157 {1971). 
[65] P.Hartman, Ordinary Differential Equations, J.Wiley & Sons, Baltimore 1973. 
[66] S.Hawking, G.F.R.Ellis, The Large Scale Structure of Space-Time, Cambridge Uni­
versity Press, Cambridge 1973. 
[67] S.Hawking, R.Penrose, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A314, 529 (1970). 
[68] W.A.Hiscock, L.G.Williams, D.M.Eardley, Phys.Rev. 026, 751 (1982). 
[69] D.Hobbill, D.Bernstein, M.Welge, D.Simkins, Class.Quantum Grav. 8, 1155 (1991). 
[70) G.Horowitz, R.Geroch, in General Relativity, an Einstein centenary survey, 
S.W.Hawking, W.Israel, eds, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1979. 
[71] L.Hormander, The Analysis of Linear Partial Differential Operators, Springer, 
Berlin 1985. 
[72] T.Hughes, T.Kato, J.Marsden, Arch.Rat.Mech.Anal. 63, 273 (1976). 
[73] V.Husain, L.Smolin, Syracuse preprint {1989). 
[74) J.Isenberg, Phys.Rev.Lett. 59, 2389 (1987). 
[75) J.Isenberg, V.Moncrief, J.Math.Phys. 26, 1024 (1985). 
126 
[76) J.lsenberg, V.Moncrief, Ann. of Physics, 199, 84 (1990). 
[77) K.Kahn, R.Penrose, Nature 229, 185 (1971). 
[78) J.L.Kelley, General Topology, D.Van Nostrand, Princeton, 1967. 
[79) D.Kramer, H.Stephani, M.MacGallum, E.Herlt; E.Schmutzer, ed., Exact Solutions 
of Einstein's Field Equations, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge 1980. 
[80) A.Kr6lak, J.Math.Phys. 28, 2685 (1987). 
[81) X.-F. Lin, R.Wald, Phys.Rev.D40, 3280 (1989); D41, 2444 (1990). 
[82) K.Maurin, Analysis, PWN-Pergamon, Warsaw-New York 1980. 
[83) G.Mess, Lorentz Space-Times of Constant Curvature, IHES preprint, 1990. 
[84) C.W.Misner, Lect. in Appl.Math. 8, 160 (1967). 
[85) C.W.Misner, A.H.Taub, Sov.Phys. JETP 28, 122 (1969). 
[86] V.Moncrief, J.Math.Phys. 16, 493 (1975). 
[87) V.Moncrief, Ann.Phys. 132, 87 (1981). 
(88] V.Moncrief, Ann.Phys. 141, 83 (1982). 
[89) V.Moncrief, J.Geom.Phys. 1, 107 (1984). 
[90) V.Moncrief, Ann.Phys. 167, 118 (1986). 
[91) V.Moncrief, J.Math.Phys. 30, 2297 (1989). 
[92] V.Moncrief, J.Math.Phys. 30, 2907 (1989). 
[93) V.Moncrief, unpublished. 
(94] V.Moncrief, D.M.Eardley, Gen.Rel.Grav. 13, 887 {1981). 
127 
[95] M.Morris, K.S.Thorne, U.Yurtsever, Phys.Rev.Lett. 61, 1446 (1988). 
[96] H.Miiller zum Hagen, H.J.Seifert, Gen.Rel.Grav. 8, 259 (1977). 
[97] H.Miiller zum Hagen, P.Yodzis, H.J.Seifert, Commun.Math.Phys. 37, 29 (1974). 
[98] R.P.A.C.Newman, Class.Quantum Grav. 3, 527 (1986). 
[99] R.P.A.C.Newman, Cosmic Censorship and the Strengths of Singularities, in Topo­
logical Properties and Global Structure of Space- Time, P.Bergmann, V.de Sabbata, 
eds, Plenum, New York 1986; Gen.Rel.Grav. 16, 175 (1984). 
[100] R.P.A.C.Newman, J.Diff.Geom. 31, 163 (1990). 
[101] A.Ori, T.Piran, Phys.Rev.Lett. 59, 2137 (1987); Phys.Rev. D42, 1068 (1990). 
[102] A.Papapetrou, Formation of a Singularity and Causality, in A Random 
Walk in Relativity and Cosmology, N.Dahdich, J.Krishna Rao, J.V.Narlikar, 
C.V.Visheshwara, eds., Wiley Eastern, New Delhi 1985. 
[103] R.Penrose, Singularities and Time Asymmetry, in General Relativity - an Einstein 
Centenary Survey, S.Hawking, Vi.Israel, ed., Cambridge University Press, Cam­
bridge 1979. 
[104] R.Penrose, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A284, 159 (1965). 
[105] R.Penrose, Riv.del Nuovo Cim. 1 (numero speziale), 252 (1969). 
[106] K.Pfaffelmoser, J.Di:ff.Eqs (in press). 
[107] A.RendaJl, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A247, 221 (1990). 
[108] A,Rendall, Cosmic Censorship and the Vlasov Equation, preprint, 1991. 
[109] LRobinson, A.Trautman, Proc.Roy.Soc.London A265, 463 (1962). 
[110] W. Rudnicki, PhD Thesis, Rzesz6w, 1991. 
128 
[111] M.P.Ryan, L.C.Shepley, Homogeneous Relativistic Cosmologies, Princeton Univer­
sity Press, Princeton 1975. 
[112] B.Schmidt, Gen.Rel.Grav. 20, 65 (1988). 
[113] R.Schoen, S.T.Yau, Commun.Math.Phys. 79, 231 (19B1). 
[114] H.-J.Seifert, Gen.Rel.Grav. 8, 815 (1977). 
[115] Shapiro, S.Teukolsky, Phys.Rev.Lett. 66, 994 (1991). 
[116] J.Shatah, Commun.Pure Appl.Math. 41, 459 (1988). 
[117] J.Shatah, A.Tahvildar-Zadeh, Non Uniqueness and Development of Singularities 
for Harmonic Maps of the Minkowski Space, preprint, 1990. 
[118] J.Shatah, A.Tahvildar-Zadeh, "Regularity of Harmonic Maps from the Minkowski 
Space into Rotationally Symmetric Manifolds", preprint, 1990. 
[119] D.Singleton, PhD Thesis, Monash University, Melbourne 1989. 
[120] D.Singleton, Class.Quantum Grav., 7, 1333 (1990). 
[121] J.A.Smoller, A.G.Wasserman, S.T.Yau, J.B.McLeod, Smooth Static Solutions of 
the Einstein- Yang-Mills Equations, preprint, 1991. 
[122] B.Steinmiiller, A.R.King, J.P.Lasota, Phys.Lett. A51, 191 (1975). 
[123] F.J.Tipler, C.J.S.Clarke, G.F.R.Ellis, Singularities and Horizons -a Review Ar­
ticle, in General Relativity and Gravitation, A.Held, ed., Plenum, New York 1980. 
[124] P.Tod, Class.Quantum Grav. 6, 1159 (1989). 
(125] B.Waugh, K.Lake, Phys.Rev.D34, 2978 (1986). 
[126] S.Weinberg, Gravitation and Cosmology, John Wiley & Sons, New York 1972. 
[127] G.Weinstein, Commun.Pure Appl.Math. 43, 903 (1990). 
129 
[128] H.Whitney, Ann.Math.Princeton 37, 645 (1936). 
[129] H.Whitney, Geometric Integration Theory, Princeton University Press, Princeton 
1957. 
[130] E.Witten, Nucl.Phys. B311, 46 (1988). 
[131] P.Yodzis, H.-J.Seifert, H.Miiller zum Hagen, Commun.Math.Phys. 34, 135 (1973). 
130 

